Dependency need is "the vital, originally infantile needs for mothering, love, affection, shelter, protection, security, food, and warmth." (Segen, 1992)[full citation needed]

A dependency need is thought to be characterized by two components: (1) It is a real need of an organism, something that must be present in order for the organism to be able to thrive, (2) It is something that an individual cannot provide for him or herself. It is well known that infants have many dependency needs; some of these needs are obvious, others have only come to the attention of researchers as the result of epidemiological studies. The more obvious needs of infants include: adequate feeding, adequate watering, adequate cleaning, adequate shelter, and more specifically, keeping the infant's body temperature within the narrow range of normalcy.

On the other hand, it was not well known until the middle of the 20th century that infants also required the presence of warmth and affection, known as "maternal warmth". The greatest number of dependency needs seem to be encompassed in infancy, but dependency needs begin to change and decrease with age and maturity. This marked decrease in dependency needs as an individual gets older can be largely attributed to the notion that, as an individual gets older, he or she becomes capable of providing these things for him or herself. To some extent, these needs remain present even into adulthood. Even as adults, people have certain universal dependency needs that remain constant throughout the lifespan that they are not able to provide for themselves; these include: the need to belong, need for affection, as well as the need for emotional support. These needs can usually be met by partnership, in which both partners get used to depending on one another. If adults lack partnership, their needs can usually be met by family and/or friend relationships.


Contents
1	Importance
2	History
3	Attachment theory's relevance
4	Further breakdown
4.1	Biological needs
4.2	Social needs
4.3	Key contributors
5	What happens when dependency needs are not met
6	Key experiments
6.1	Harry Harlow monkey experiment
6.2	René Spitz orphan study
6.3	Types of attachment
7	Today and future
7.1	Current research
7.1.1	Relationship to female suicide attempts
7.2	Viability
8	Conclusions
9	References
Importance
Dependency need is an important psychological concept, encompassing the fields of psychological, evolutionary, and ethological theory. Need, in general, is a concept greatly studied in varying psychological fields, by psychologists with varying specialties. Need is particularly important to the area of personality psychology. The concept of need can be defined as a "state of tension within a person", and as the need is satisfied, the state of tension is reduced. (Larsen & Buss, 2008) It is thought that all individuals have needs, and that needs organize perceptions, guiding individuals to see what they want (or need) to see (Larsen & Buss). A physical or psychological need is capable of organizing action by compelling an individual to do what is necessary in order to fulfill such a need. (Larsen & Buss, 2008) After action has been taken to fulfill the need, the need subsides until it is again desired and recurs.

History
It can be hypothesized that the concept of dependency need originated from the well-known psychologists Henry Murray and Abraham Maslow's ideas about needs. According to Murray, a need can be defined as a "potentiality or readiness to respond in a certain way under certain circumstances." (Murray, 1938) Murray purposed a list of fundamental human needs. Each need was thought to be associated with "(1) a specific desire or intention, (2) a particular set of emotions, and (3) specific action tendencies." (Larsen & Buss, 2008) Murray believed that human beings had their own hierarchy of needs, unique to each individual. (Larsen & Buss, 2008) It is thought that each individual's various needs exist at different levels of strength.

According to Maslow, the concept of need can be defined primarily by an individual's goals. (Larsen & Buss, 2008) Maslow was a firm believer of self-actualization, the process of becoming "more and more what one idiosyncratically is, becoming everything that one is capable of becoming." (Larson & Buss, 2008) Maslow believed that needs were hierarchically organized, with more basic needs found toward the bottom of the hierarchy and the self-actualization need at the top. The needs defined by Murray and Maslow (physiological needs, safety needs, belongingness needs, esteem needs, self-actualization needs) seem to correspond with the vital needs encompassed in the concept of dependency need.

Attachment theory's relevance
Dependency needs can sometimes be associated with Attachment Theory. Attachment can be defined as a "deep and enduring emotional bond that connects one person to another across time and space." (Ainsworth, 1973; Bowlby, 1969) Attachment is thought to first occur between an infant and his or her primary caregiver. (Hetherington & Parke, 1999) Harry Harlow and his research in developmental psychology showed that attachment between infant and caregiver is vitally important to the psychological development of the infant and requires physical contact with a warm and responsive mother. (Larsen & Buss, 2008) These early experiences and reactions of the infants to the primary caregivers become working models for later adult relationships. (Larsen & Buss, 2008) Therefore, conclusions can be visibly drawn linking attachment and dependency need; vital, infantile needs for mothering, love, affection, shelter, protection, security, food, and warmth (dependency need) can stem from the type of interaction between that of an infant and his or her primary caregiver. Three types of attachment styles, securely attached, avoidantly attached, and ambivalently attached, can result from varying levels and styles of care a primary caregiver provides an infant.

Further breakdown
Dependency needs can be categorized into biological needs and social needs.

Biological needs
Biological needs are basic survival needs, such as protection from harm, consumption of food, and regulation of body temperature; they are mechanisms used to promote and maintain proper body functioning.

Social needs
Social needs are "acquired psychological processes that activate emotional responses to particular need-relevant incentives." (Reeve, 2009) Need for eye contact, expression of positive emotions by caretakers or loved ones, and cuddling—anything that fosters a sense of emotional security—can be defined as a social need. There are four basic social needs: power, achievement, intimacy, and affiliation. People who have power needs look to gain dominance, achieve high statuses, and/or achieve high positions in their occupations, households, or social groups or organizations. These people look for leadership roles, and are usually happy and content when they are in control. People who have achievement needs are willing to seek out and accomplish tasks. The strive for achievement can develop strongly in children when influenced by their parents. Intimacy needs are linked to affiliation needs. Intimacy needs can be sought out and met when in close, personal relationships with others. Fulfillment of intimacy needs can help decrease an individual's chance of developing onset of depression, as well as help reduce an individual's fears of being rejected. Affiliation needs are people's needs to feel a sense of involvement and "belonging" within a social group; affiliation needs have to do more with the acceptance of behavior. It is human nature for people to want to be liked by others and get approval from them. It is also innate for people to want to maintain healthy and positive relationships with others around them.

Key contributors
There have been numerous theorists who have done research in relation to dependency need.

Robert Bornstein, a professor of psychology, researched certain levels of dependency needs, as well as personality disorders related to dependency needs, including dependent personality disorder (DPD) and histrionic personality disorder (HPD). Henry Murray's publication, Explorations in Personality (1938) describes differences and similarities between types of dependency needs.

As mentioned previously, Abraham Maslow was a key contributor to the establishment of a dependency need theory. His need theory, Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs, is thought to help a person achieve the unsatisfied needs of one's self. In his hierarchy, he outlined five needs crucial to human development and happiness across the lifespan; they are thought to occur in stages. The five stages include, physiological needs, safety needs, social needs, self-esteem needs, and self-actualization. Physiological needs are needs that everyone has to have in order to survive, such as air, food, water, and sleep. After a person has attained these physiological needs, he or she then focuses his or her attention to safety needs. Safety needs help an individual feel secure in order to make him or her feel safe, physically and emotionally. An example of this can be seen in people's choices of where they choose to live and work, and attaining medical insurance. After safety needs are met, social needs are the focus of attention. Social needs have to do with interactions with others (friends, family, romantic partners) and receiving love. After these needs have been met, one's self-esteem needs begin to arise. Esteem needs can be both internal and external. Having and achieving self-respect, receiving attention, and accomplishing achievements are examples of self-esteem needs. After one succeeds in the area of self-esteem, self-actualization needs are to be met. One's full potential as a person, his or her self-actualization, helps him or her keep developing as a person throughout the lifespan. (Maslow, 2002)

Another key contributor to the establishment of dependency need theory was Sigmund Freud's theory of psychosexual development.

Freud's theory of psychosexual development

Sigmund Freud came up with a five-stage theory that stated human beings are born with sexual energy; this energy was thought to develop in five stages (oral, anal, phallic, latency, and genital stages). The first stage, the oral stage, occurs from birth to two years of age. The key component of the oral stage is the child's fascination with his or her mouth, more specifically, putting items into his or her mouth, breast feeding, etc. The child is thought to get great pleasure from such objects being placed in his or her mouth. The second stage, the anal stage, occurs from 18 months of age to three years. In this stage, the child's main focus is on his or her anus, and the experience of toilet training is thought to be quite pleasurable. The third phase, the phallic stage, occurs from three to six years of age. In this stage, the main focus of the child is on discovering his or her genital region. Children become more aware of their own bodies, the bodies of other children, as well as their parents' bodies. Children also become aware of anatomical sex differences between male and female genitalia. Freud believed during this stage, that boys had the idea that they needed to compete with their fathers in order to possess their mothers. He also believed that girls felt penis envy towards males, and therefore blamed their mothers for not having a penis; the girls then competed for psychosexual possession of their fathers. The fourth stage, the latency stage, occurs from six years of age until the child reaches puberty. In this stage, children are thought to be "latent" of sexual energies, however sexual urges still remain. During this time, children play with the same sex friends. The final stage in psychosexual development is the genital stage, occurring from puberty through the rest of adulthood. In this stage, individuals focus on detaching from their parents, doing their own thing and not relying as much on their parents. In this stage, genitalia is the main focus and sexual energy and urges are normal. The person's concern is now focused on mature, adult friendships and family relationships, as well as intimate relationships, and adult responsibilities. (Basic, 2011)

There are differences and similarities worth noting when it comes to biological needs and social needs. Biological needs are required for survival in everyday life, whereas social needs are acquired and learned. Similarities between the two include the relevance that an individual requires both types of needs in one's life in order to live happy, healthy lives in which he or she is able to thrive and succeed; if an individual's needs are not met, he or she may become sad and/or depressed.

What happens when dependency needs are not met
A person's vital needs for mothering, love, affection, shelter, protection, security, food, and warmth are ever so important to an individual. If these dependency needs are not met, particularly when an individual is younger, emotional, psychological, as well as physical problems may result down the road. Also, intellectual disability or even death can result in extreme cases of neglect of dependency needs (usually in cases when biological needs are neglected).[citation needed] In general, depression, sadness, and loneliness are likely results if dependency needs are not met, regardless of the individual's age.

Key experiments
Many experiments relating the importance of dependency need have been conducted over the years; here, three influential experiments are outlined.

Harry Harlow monkey experiment

Harlow exclusively used rhesus macaques in his experiments.
When this study was conducted in 1957, Harry Harlow was questioning current theories about dependency and love. At this time, Harlow and his team stated that love began developing as a feeding bond between an infant and its mother; this notion applied to family members, as well. It was also thought that humans, along with other social animals, lived in organized societies in order to regularize sexual contact. Harlow, being fascinated with the concept of love and nurturing, worked with monkeys to test these theories. (Berger, 2005)

In Harlow's monkey experiment, newborn monkeys were separated from their mothers almost immediately after birth. They were then raised with substitute "mothers" made of either (1) wire or (2) wood covered with a soft cloth. In one of the experiments, both the wire and wood mothers were presented to the infant monkey in the same cage, and only one wore a nipple, which the infant was able to nurse from. Some of the monkeys nursed from the wire mother, and others from the cloth mother. According to Berger, Harlow found that even when the wire mother was the source of food the infant monkey spent more of its time with the cloth surrogate. Harlow also found that the cloth mother provided not only food to the infant monkeys, but also was able to provide comfort and security for them. The interpretation made by Harlow about this was that the liking for the cloth surrogate mother showed the importance of affection, emotion, nurturing, and dependency in mother-child relationships.

René Spitz orphan study
The phenomenon of infant dependency need was first noticed in René Spitz's orphan study. It was during this study that researchers learned of the higher mortality rates for infants maintained in orphanages. When the obvious factors such as inadequate nutrition, contagious diseases, etc., were ruled out, researchers discovered that mortality rates could be greatly ameliorated by having the nurses in charge of the infants in the orphanages cuddle them in a way that approximated the amount of cuddling infants would normally receive from their own parents.

Spitz's orphan study focused on two groups of children, starting when the children were infants, and continued all the way until they reached 12 years of age. The first group of children were raised in an orphanage; the children in this group only received minimal care, let alone any special, one-on-one time with a caregiver. In the second group, each infant received individual care from various women caregivers serving a prison sentence; these caregivers were with the children for the first year of their lives. When the children in each group turned two years old, dramatic differences occurred between them.

Results from the experiment showed drastic differences. It was found that children raised in the orphanage, who had received minimal care, had less developmental progress than children raised in the prison. Only 26 kids could walk, and only a few could talk. Some of the orphanage kids had signs of intellectual disability and were psychologically and socially underdeveloped for their age. Whereas in the prison group, most all the children had reached the point of full development for their age division.

Defined previously, dependency needs are "The vital, originally infantile needs for mothering, love, affection, shelter, protection, security, food, and warmth" (Segen, 1992). When those needs are not met psychological, emotional, physical and attachment problems can arise. This was shown in the Spitz orphan study. (Shepard, 2013)

Types of attachment
"Attachment theory states that a child's first relationship is a love relationship that will have profound, long-lasting effects on an individual's subsequent development." (Colin, 1991) The closeness of the child to the person providing protection and a sense of security will bond this figure to the child. This figure lays the foundation for the child to be able to form other secure relationships in the future. There are four main types of attachment, including: secure, anxious/avoidant, anxious/ambivalent and disorganized/disoriented.

In securely attached babies, the baby's attachment figure is an effective secure base from them. They are able to explore the world and can even handle brief separation in an environment unfamiliar to them. They are secure in the fact that they know the attachment figure will return and that there is little to no anxiety experienced. (Colin, 1991)

In anxious/avoidant attachment, the baby is anxious about the attachment figure's (typically a parent) responsiveness. The baby then develops a defensive strategy for managing his or her own anxiety. The baby experiencing this situation has very little, to no confidence in relation to being responded to; so when the baby seeks care, the child expects to be rejected. For example, if the baby is hungry, he or she will not tell anyone/cry because he or she doesn't expect anyone to meet this need. (Colin, 1991)

In anxious/ambivalent attachment, signs of anxiety, anger, and mixed feelings about the attachment figure are present in the baby; this is especially true after brief separations of the baby from the attachment figure, occurring in unfamiliar environments. (Colin, 1991)

In disorganized/disoriented babies, the baby does not have a consistent strategy for managing separation and reunion with his or her attachment figure. Some of the babies show to be depressed, demonstrate avoidant behavior, express anger, and/or show disturbing behaviors. Infants in this category have typically been maltreated. (Colin, 1991)

Today and future
Current research
The research currently being done in the last few years in relation to dependency need relates largely to attachment theory. Most studies of attachment theory focus on how attachment relates to other aspects in the individual's life; for example, how an individual's attachment style (developed early on) affects his or her display of emotions after a break-up, or how an individual's attachment style affects his or her ability to make new friends in college.

A study done in 2010 by Stephanie Parade, Esther Leerke, and Nayena Blankson looked at the correlation between an individual's attachment to his or her parents and how well he or she is able to make friends; this study specifically focused on college-age individuals. The study also looked at social anxiety as the mediator. The results of this study show the more securely attached a person is to his or her parents; the easier it is for him or her to make friends. These findings are consistent with Bowlby's proposition. The authors also found that social anxiety only showed up in the minority. The participants in the minority group had less social anxiety when they had a secure relationship with their parents, which in turn helped them be more sociable overall. (Parade, Leerke, & Blankson, 2010)

Another current study done by Gnilka, Ashby, and Noble, looked at "adult attachment styles and the psychological outcomes, like hopelessness and life satisfaction, using maladaptive and adaptive perfectionism as the mediators." (Gnika, Ashby, & Noble, 2013) The results show that having high levels of avoidant or anxiety attachment will cause low maladaptive perfectionism, which overall makes one more likely to have low life satisfaction and high levels of hopelessness. These findings can benefit counselors when working with patients who have problems with perfectionism.

Relationship to female suicide attempts
Little research occurs in this field today. One article, done in 1995, looked at female suicide and dependency needs. The focus of the article was on the dependency needs of female adolescent suicide attempters and non-attempters. It also looked at other social network and intimate relationships for both suicide attempters and non-attempters. The authors hypothesized that dependency needs would be higher in suicide attempters. The results displayed a similarity in both groups, although, the sample size was too small to generalize to attempters. The article suggests future research on the range of dependency and the effect dependency might have on suicide. (Beettridge & Favreau, 1995)

Viability
In the last decade, research on the topic of dependency need has been declining. The theory of dependency need has largely been incorporated into attachment theory.

Conclusions
Vital, originally infantile needs for mothering, love, affection, shelter, protection, security, food, and warmth, more specifically known as "dependency needs", change and decrease with age and maturity. As an individual gets older, these needs usually decrease in strength and can normally be met individually, or fulfilled by relationships among partners, family members or friends.

By looking at historical research pioneered by Murray, Maslow, Freud, and Harlow, as well as more recent concepts developed by Spritz, Colin, Parade et al., Beettridge and Favreau, one can determine that dependency need is an important psychological concept, encompassed in many areas of psychology.[citation needed] Throughout time, the basic needs related to safety, love, affection, and protection have seemed to be a subject of utmost importance. No matter the way one theorizes the concept of dependency need, it is well known that all humans seem to have these basics needs. It is also known that if these needs are somehow not adequately met, the person who has been neglected in this way, will likely develop deep-seated emotional, psychological, and possibly even physical hardships.[citation needed]

Today, the concept of dependency need is largely interrelated with the concept of attachment theory.[citation needed] Nowadays, a lot of attachment theory studies are interested in seeing if there is a relationship between a person's style of attachment (developed in infancy) and the way in which he or she deals with whatever life throws his or her way (years later); i.e., dealing with emotions after a break-up or making friendships in college. Conclusions can be visibly drawn linking attachment and dependency need; vital, infantile needs for mothering, love, affection, shelter, protection, security, food, and warmth (dependency need) can stem from the type of interaction between that of an infant and his or her primary caregiver. Attachment theory can also go beyond infancy to look at how early interactions have shaped an individual's personality, and how he or she deals with life situations years and years down the road. Dependency need continues to be a concept that is of great interest to psychologists (more specifically tied into attachment theory) and is ever-present in the everyday lives of all human beings

Dependent personality disorder (DPD) is characterized by a pervasive psychological dependence on other people. This personality disorder is a long-term condition[1] in which people depend on others to meet their emotional and physical needs, with only a minority achieving normal levels of independence.[citation needed] Dependent personality disorder is a cluster C personality disorder,[2] which is characterized by excessive fear and anxiety. It begins prior to early adulthood, and it is present in a variety of contexts and is associated with inadequate functioning. Symptoms can include anything from extreme passivity, devastation or helplessness when relationships end, avoidance of responsibilities and severe submission.


Contents
1	Signs and symptoms
2	Risk factors
3	Causes
4	Diagnosis
4.1	American Psychiatric Association and DSM
4.2	World Health Organization
4.3	SWAP-200
4.4	Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual
4.5	Differential diagnosis
5	Treatment
6	Epidemiology
6.1	Millon's subtypes
7	History
8	References
8.1	Sources
9	External links
Signs and symptoms
People who have dependent personality disorder are overdependent on other people when it comes to making decisions. They cannot make a decision on their own as they need constant approval from other people. Consequently, individuals diagnosed with DPD tend to place needs and opinions of others above their own as they do not have the confidence to trust their decisions. This kind of behaviour can explain why people with DPD tend to show passive and clingy behaviour. These individuals display a fear of separation and cannot stand being alone. When alone, they experience feelings of isolation and loneliness due to their overwhelming dependence on other people. Generally people with DPD are also pessimistic: they expect the worst out of situations or believe that the worst will happen. They tend to be more introverted and are more sensitive to criticism and fear rejection.[3]

Risk factors
People with a history of neglect and an abusive upbringing are more susceptible to develop DPD, specifically those involved in long-term abusive relationships. Those with overprotective or authoritarian parents are also more at risk to develop DPD. Having a family history of anxiety disorder can play a role in the development of DPD as a 2004 twin study found a 0.81 heritability for personality disorders collectively.[4]

Causes
The exact cause of dependent personality disorder is unknown.[5] A study in 2012 estimated that between 55% and 72% of the risk of the condition is inherited from one's parents.[6] The difference between a "dependent personality" and a "dependent personality disorder" is somewhat subjective, which makes diagnosis sensitive to cultural influences such as gender role expectations.

Dependent traits in children tended to increase with parenting behaviours and attitudes characterized by overprotectiveness and authoritarianism. Thus the likelihood of developing dependent personality disorder increased, since these parenting traits can limit them from developing a sense of autonomy, rather teaching them that others are powerful and competent.[7]

Traumatic or adverse experiences early in an individual's life, such as neglect and abuse or serious illness, can increase the likelihood of developing personality disorders, including dependent personality disorder, later on in life. This is especially prevalent for those individuals who also experience high interpersonal stress and poor social support.[7]

There is a higher frequency of the disorder seen in women than men, hence expectations relating to gender role may contribute to some extent.[7]

Diagnosis
Clinicians and clinical researchers conceptualize dependent personality disorder in terms of four related components:

Cognitive: a perception of oneself as powerless and ineffectual, coupled with the belief that other people are comparatively powerful and potent.
Motivational: a desire to obtain and maintain relationships with protectors and caregivers.
Behavioral: a pattern of relationship-facilitating behavior designed to strengthen interpersonal ties and minimize the possibility of abandonment and rejection.
Emotional: fear of abandonment, fear of rejection, and anxiety regarding evaluation by figures of authority.[8]
American Psychiatric Association and DSM
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) contains a dependent personality disorder diagnosis. It refers to a pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of which leads to submissive and clinging behavior and fears of separation. This begins prior to early adulthood and can be present in a variety of contexts.[9]

In the DSM Fifth Edition (DSM-5), there is one criterion by which there are eight features of dependent personality disorder. The disorder is indicated by at least five of the following factors:[10]

Has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others.
Needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of their life.
Has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear of loss of support or approval.
Has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on their own (because of a lack of self confidence in judgment or abilities rather than a lack of motivation or energy).
Goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from others, to the point of volunteering to do things that are unpleasant.
Feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated fears of being unable to care for themselves.
Urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and support when a close relationship ends.
Is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take care of themselves.[11]
The diagnosis of personality disorders in the fourth edition Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, including dependent personality disorder, was found to be problematic due to reasons such as excessive diagnostic comorbidity, inadequate coverage, arbitrary boundaries with normal psychological functioning, and heterogeneity among individuals within the same categorial diagnosis.[12]

World Health Organization
The World Health Organization's ICD-10 lists dependent personality disorder as F60.7 Dependent personality disorder:[13]

It is characterized by at least 4 of the following:

Encouraging or allowing others to make most of one's important life decisions;
Subordination of one's own needs to those of others on whom one is dependent, and undue compliance with their wishes;
Unwillingness to make even reasonable demands on the people one depends on;
Feeling uncomfortable or helpless when alone, because of exaggerated fears of inability to care for oneself;
Preoccupation with fears of being abandoned by a person with whom one has a close relationship, and of being left to care for oneself;
Limited capacity to make everyday decisions without an excessive amount of advice and reassurance from others.
Associated features may include perceiving oneself as helpless, incompetent, and lacking stamina.

Includes:

Asthenic, inadequate, passive, and self-defeating personality (disorder)
It is a requirement of ICD-10 that a diagnosis of any specific personality disorder also satisfies a set of general personality disorder criteria.

SWAP-200
The SWAP-200 is a diagnostic tool that was proposed with the goal of overcoming limitations, such as limited external validity for the diagnostic criteria for dependent personality disorder, to the DSM. It serves as a possible alternative nosological system that emerged from the efforts to create an empirically based approach to personality disorders – while also preserving the complexity of clinical reality.[10] Dependent personality disorder is considered a clinical prototype in the context of the SWAP-200. Rather than discrete symptoms, it provides composite description characteristic criteria – such as personality tendencies.[10]

Based on the Q-Sort method and prototype matching, the SWAP-200 is a personality assessment procedure relying on an external observer's judgment. It provides:

A personality diagnosis expressed as the matching with ten prototypical descriptions of DSM-IV personality disorders.
A personality diagnosis based on the matching of the patient with 11 Q-factors of personality derived empirically.
A dimensional profile of healthy and adaptive functioning.[10]
The traits that define dependent personality disorder according to SWAP-200 are:

They tend to become attached quickly and/or intensely, developing feelings and expectations that are not warranted by the history or context of the relationship.
Since they tend to be ingratiating and submissive, people with DPD tend to be in relationships in which they are emotionally or physically abused.
They tend to feel ashamed, inadequate, and depressed.
They also feel powerless and tend to be suggestible.
They are often anxious and tend to feel guilty.
These people have difficulty acknowledging and expressing anger and struggle to get their own needs and goals met.
Unable to soothe or comfort themselves when distressed, they require involvement of another person to help regulate their emotions.[10]
Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual
The Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual (PDM) approaches dependent personality disorder in a descriptive, rather than prescriptive sense and has received empirical support. The Psychodynamic Diagnostic Manual includes two different types of dependent personality disorder:[10]

Passive-aggressive
Counter-dependent [10]
The PDM-2 adopts and applies a prototypic approach, using empirical measures like the SWAP-200. It was influenced by a developmental and empirically grounded perspective, as proposed by Sidney Blatt.[10] This model is of particular interest when focusing on dependent personality disorder, claiming that psychopathology comes from distortions of two main coordinates of psychological development:

The anaclitic/introjective dimension.
The relatedness/self-definition dimension.[10]
The anaclitic personality organization in individuals exhibits difficulties in interpersonal relatedness, exhibiting the following behaviours:

Preoccupation with relationships
Fear of abandonment and of rejection
Seeking closeness and intimacy
Difficulty managing interpersonal boundaries
Tend to have an anxious-preoccupied attachment style.[10]
Introjective personality style is associated with problems in self-definition.[10]

Differential diagnosis
There are similarities between individuals with dependent personality disorder and individuals with borderline personality disorder, in that they both have a fear of abandonment. Those with dependent personality disorder do not exhibit impulsive behaviour, unstable affect, and poor self-image experienced by those with borderline personality disorder, differentiating the two disorders.[14]

Treatment
People who have DPD are generally treated with psychotherapy. The main goal of this therapy is to make the individual more independent and help them form healthy relationships with the people around them. This is done by improving their self-esteem and confidence.[15]

Medication can be used to treat patients with depression or anxiety because of their DPD, but this does not treat the core problems caused by DPD.[15]

Epidemiology
Based on a recent survey of 43,093 Americans, 0.49% of adults meet diagnostic criteria for DPD (National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions; NESARC; Grant et al., 2004).[16] Traits related to DPD, like most personality disorders, emerge in childhood or early adulthood. Findings from the NESArC study found that 18 to 29 year olds have a greater chance of developing DPD. DPD is more common among women compared to men as 0.6% of women have DPD compared to 0.4% of men.[3]

A 2004 twin study suggests a heritability of 0.81 for developing dependent personality disorder. Because of this, there is significant evidence that this disorder runs in families.[4]

Children and adolescents with a history of anxiety disorders and physical illnesses are more susceptible to acquiring this disorder.[17]

Millon's subtypes
Psychologist Theodore Millon identified five adult subtypes of dependent personality disorder.[18][19] Any individual dependent may exhibit none or one of the following:

Subtype	Personality Traits
Disquieted dependent (Including avoidant features)	Restlessly perturbed; disconcerted and fretful; feels dread and foreboding; apprehensively vulnerable to abandonment; lonely unless near supportive figures.
Selfless dependent (Including masochistic features)	Merges with and immersed into another; is engulfed, enshrouded, absorbed, incorporated, willingly giving up own identity; becomes one with or an extension of another.
Immature dependent (Variant of "pure" pattern)	Unsophisticated, half-grown, unversed, childlike; undeveloped, inexperienced, gullible, and unformed; incapable of assuming adult responsibilities.
Accommodating dependent (Including histrionic features)	Gracious, neighborly, eager, benevolent, compliant, obliging, agreeable; denies disturbing feelings; adopts submissive and inferior role well.
Ineffectual dependent (Including schizoid features)	Unproductive, gainless, incompetent, meritless; seeks untroubled life; refuses to deal with difficulties; untroubled by shortcomings.
History
The conceptualization of dependency, within classical psychoanalytic theory, is directly related to Freud's oral psychosexual stage of development. Frustration or over-gratification was said to result in an oral fixation and in an oral type of character, characterized by feeling dependent on others for nurturance and by behaviours representative of the oral stage. Later psychoanalytic theories shifted the focus from a drive-based approach of dependency to the recognition of the importance of early relationships and establishing separation from these early caregivers, in which the exchanges between the caregiver and the child become internalized, and the nature of these interactions becomes part of the concepts of the self and of others.[10]

Substance dependence, also known as drug dependence, is a biopsychological situation whereby an individual's functionality is dependent on the necessitated re-consumption of a psychoactive substance because of an adaptive state that has developed within the individual from psychoactive substance consumption that results in the experience of withdrawal and that necessitates the re-consumption of the drug.[1][2] A drug addiction, a distinct concept from substance dependence, is defined as compulsive, out-of-control drug use, despite negative consequences.[1][2] An addictive drug is a drug which is both rewarding and reinforcing.[1] ΔFosB, a gene transcription factor, is now known to be a critical component and common factor in the development of virtually all forms of behavioral and drug addictions,[3][4][5] but not dependence.

The International Classification of Diseases classifies substance dependence as a mental and behavioural disorder.[6] Within the framework of the 4th edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), substance dependence is redefined as a drug addiction, and can be diagnosed without the occurrence of a withdrawal syndrome.[7] It was described accordingly: "When an individual persists in use of alcohol or other drugs despite problems related to use of the substance, substance dependence may be diagnosed. Compulsive and repetitive use may result in tolerance to the effect of the drug and withdrawal symptoms when use is reduced or stopped. This, along with Substance Abuse are considered Substance Use Disorders."[8] In the DSM-5 (released in 2013), substance abuse and substance dependence have been merged into the category of substance use disorders and they no longer exist as individual diagnoses.[9]

Addiction and dependence glossary[10][11][12][13]
addiction – a biopsychosocial disorder characterized by persistent use of drugs (including alcohol) despite substantial harm and adverse consequences
addictive drug – psychoactive substances that with repeated use are associated with significantly higher rates of substance use disorders, due in large part to the drug's effect on brain reward systems
dependence – an adaptive state associated with a withdrawal syndrome upon cessation of repeated exposure to a stimulus (e.g., drug intake)
drug sensitization or reverse tolerance – the escalating effect of a drug resulting from repeated administration at a given dose
drug withdrawal – symptoms that occur upon cessation of repeated drug use
physical dependence – dependence that involves persistent physical–somatic withdrawal symptoms (e.g., fatigue and delirium tremens)
psychological dependence – dependence that involves emotional–motivational withdrawal symptoms (e.g., dysphoria and anhedonia)
reinforcing stimuli – stimuli that increase the probability of repeating behaviors paired with them
rewarding stimuli – stimuli that the brain interprets as intrinsically positive and desirable or as something to approach
sensitization – an amplified response to a stimulus resulting from repeated exposure to it
substance use disorder – a condition in which the use of substances leads to clinically and functionally significant impairment or distress
tolerance – the diminishing effect of a drug resulting from repeated administration at a given dose
vte

Contents
1	Withdrawal
2	Risk factors
2.1	Dependence potential
2.2	Capture rates
3	Biomolecular mechanisms
3.1	Psychological dependence
3.2	Physical dependence
4	Diagnosis
4.1	DSM classification
5	Management
5.1	Residential
5.2	Behavioral programming
5.3	Alternative therapies
6	Treatment and issues
6.1	Cognitive approach
6.2	Medicinal approach
7	History
8	Society and culture
8.1	Demographics
8.2	Legislation
9	See also
10	References
11	External links
Withdrawal
Main article: Drug withdrawal
Withdrawal is the body's reaction to abstaining from a substance upon which a person has developed a dependence syndrome. When dependence has developed, cessation of substance-use produces an unpleasant state, which promotes continued drug use through negative reinforcement; i.e., the drug is used to escape or avoid re-entering the associated withdrawal state. The withdrawal state may include physical-somatic symptoms (physical dependence), emotional-motivational symptoms (psychological dependence), or both. Chemical and hormonal imbalances may arise if the substance is not re-introduced. Psychological stress may also result if the substance is not re-introduced.[14]

Infants also experience substance withdrawal, known as neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS), which can have severe and life-threatening effects. Addiction to drugs such as alcohol in expectant mothers not only causes NAS, but also an array of other issues which can continually affect the infant throughout their lifetime.[15]

Risk factors

Mental health as a risk factor for illicit drug dependency or abuse.
Dependence potential
The dependence potential of a drug varies from substance to substance, and from individual to individual. Dose, frequency, pharmacokinetics of a particular substance, route of administration, and time are critical factors for developing a drug dependence.

An article in The Lancet compared the harm and dependence liability of 20 drugs, using a scale from zero to three for physical dependence, psychological dependence, and pleasure to create a mean score for dependence. Selected results can be seen in the chart below.[16]

Drug	Mean	Pleasure	Psychological dependence	Physical dependence
Heroin	3.00	3.0	3.0	3.0
Cocaine	2.39	3.0	2.8	1.3
Tobacco	2.21	2.3	2.6	1.8
Barbiturates	2.01	2.0	2.2	1.8
Alcohol	1.93	2.3	1.9	1.6
Benzodiazepines	1.83	1.7	2.1	1.8
Amphetamine	1.67	2.0	1.9	1.1
Cannabis	1.51	1.9	1.7	0.8
Ecstasy	1.13	1.5	1.2	0.7
Capture rates
Capture rates enumerate the percentage of users who reported that they had become dependent to their respective drug at some point.[17][18]

Drug	% of users
Cannabis	9%
Alcohol	15.4%
Cocaine	16.7%
Heroin	23.1%
Tobacco	31.9%
Biomolecular mechanisms
Psychological dependence
Two factors have been identified as playing pivotal roles in psychological dependence: the neuropeptide "corticotropin-releasing factor" (CRF) and the gene transcription factor "cAMP response element binding protein" (CREB).[10] The nucleus accumbens (NAcc) is one brain structure that has been implicated in the psychological component of drug dependence. In the NAcc, CREB is activated by cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) immediately after a high and triggers changes in gene expression that affect proteins such as dynorphin; dynorphin peptides reduce dopamine release into the NAcc by temporarily inhibiting the reward pathway. A sustained activation of CREB thus forces a larger dose to be taken to reach the same effect. In addition, it leaves the user feeling generally depressed and dissatisfied, and unable to find pleasure in previously enjoyable activities, often leading to a return to the drug for another dose.[19]

In addition to CREB, it is hypothesized that stress mechanisms play a role in dependence. Koob and Kreek have hypothesized that during drug use, CRF activates the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis (HPA axis) and other stress systems in the extended amygdala. This activation influences the dysregulated emotional state associated with psychological dependence. They found that as drug use escalates, so does the presence of CRF in human cerebrospinal fluid. In rat models, the separate use of CRF inhibitors and CRF receptor antagonists both decreased self-administration of the drug of study. Other studies in this review showed dysregulation of other neuropeptides that affect the HPA axis, including enkephalin which is an endogenous opioid peptide that regulates pain. It also appears that µ-opioid receptors, which enkephalin acts upon, is influential in the reward system and can regulate the expression of stress hormones.[20]

Increased expression of AMPA receptors in nucleus accumbens MSNs is a potential mechanism of aversion produced by drug withdrawal.[21]

Physical dependence
Upregulation of the cAMP signal transduction pathway in the locus coeruleus by CREB has been implicated as the mechanism responsible for certain aspects of opioid-induced physical dependence.[22] The temporal course of withdrawal correlates with LC firing, and administration of α2 agonists into the locus coeruleus leads to a decrease in LC firing and norepinephrine release during withdrawal. A possible mechanism involves upregulation of NMDA receptors, which is supported by the attenuation of withdraw by NMDA receptor antagonists.[23] Physical dependence on opioids has been observed to produce an elevation of extracellular glutamate, an increase in NMDA receptor subunits NR1 and NR2A, phosphorylated CaMKII, and c-fos. Expression of CaMKII and c-fos is attenuated by NMDA receptor antagonists, which is associated with blunted withdrawal in adult rats, but not neonatal rats[24] While acute administration of opioids decreases AMPA receptor expression and depresses both NMDA and non-NMDA excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the NAC, withdrawal involves a lowered threshold for LTP and an increase in spontaneous firing in the NAc.[25]

Diagnosis
DSM classification
"Substance dependence", as defined in the DSM-IV, can be diagnosed with physiological dependence, evidence of tolerance or withdrawal, or without physiological dependence. DSM-IV substance dependencies include:

303.90 Alcohol dependence
304.00 Opioid dependence
304.10 Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic dependence (including benzodiazepine dependence and barbiturate dependence)
304.20 Cocaine dependence
304.30 Cannabis dependence
304.40 Amphetamine dependence (or amphetamine-like)
304.50 Hallucinogen dependence
304.60 Inhalant dependence
304.80 Polysubstance dependence
304.90 Phencyclidine (or phencyclidine-like) dependence
304.90 Other (or unknown) substance dependence
305.10 Nicotine dependence
Management
Addiction is a complex but treatable condition. It is characterized by compulsive drug craving, seeking, and use that persists even if the user is aware of severe adverse consequences. For some people, addiction becomes chronic, with periodic relapses even after long periods of abstinence. As a chronic, relapsing disease, addiction may require continued treatments to increase the intervals between relapses and diminish their intensity. While some with substance issues recover and lead fulfilling lives, others require ongoing additional support. The ultimate goal of addiction treatment is to enable an individual to manage their substance misuse; for some this may mean abstinence. Immediate goals are often to reduce substance abuse, improve the patient's ability to function, and minimize the medical and social complications of substance abuse and their addiction; this is called "harm reduction".

Treatments for addiction vary widely according to the types of drugs involved, amount of drugs used, duration of the drug addiction, medical complications and the social needs of the individual. Determining the best type of recovery program for an addicted person depends on a number of factors, including: personality, drugs of choice, concept of spirituality or religion, mental or physical illness, and local availability and affordability of programs.

Many different ideas circulate regarding what is considered a successful outcome in the recovery from addiction. Programs that emphasize controlled drinking exist for alcohol addiction. Opiate replacement therapy has been a medical standard of treatment for opioid addiction for many years.

Treatments and attitudes toward addiction vary widely among different countries. In the US and developing countries, the goal of commissioners of treatment for drug dependence is generally total abstinence from all drugs. Other countries, particularly in Europe, argue the aims of treatment for drug dependence are more complex, with treatment aims including reduction in use to the point that drug use no longer interferes with normal activities such as work and family commitments; shifting the addict away from more dangerous routes of drug administration such as injecting to safer routes such as oral administration; reduction in crime committed by drug addicts; and treatment of other comorbid conditions such as AIDS, hepatitis and mental health disorders. These kinds of outcomes can be achieved without eliminating drug use completely. Drug treatment programs in Europe often report more favorable outcomes than those in the US because the criteria for measuring success are functional rather than abstinence-based.[26][27][28] The supporters of programs with total abstinence from drugs as a goal believe that enabling further drug use means prolonged drug use and risks an increase in addiction and complications from addiction.[29]

Residential
Residential drug treatment can be broadly divided into two camps: 12-step programs and therapeutic communities. 12-step programs are a nonclinical support-group and spiritual-based approach to treating addiction. Therapy typically involves the use of cognitive-behavioral therapy, an approach that looks at the relationship between thoughts, feelings and behaviors, addressing the root cause of maladaptive behavior. Cognitive-behavioral therapy treats addiction as a behavior rather than a disease, and so is subsequently curable, or rather, unlearnable. Cognitive-behavioral therapy programs recognize that, for some individuals, controlled use is a more realistic possibility.[30]

One of many recovery methods are 12-step recovery programs, with prominent examples including Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, Drug Addicts Anonymous[31] and Pills Anonymous. They are commonly known and used for a variety of addictions for the individual addicted and the family of the individual. Substance-abuse rehabilitation (rehab) centers offer a residential treatment program for some of the more seriously addicted, in order to isolate the patient from drugs and interactions with other users and dealers. Outpatient clinics usually offer a combination of individual counseling and group counseling. Frequently, a physician or psychiatrist will prescribe medications in order to help patients cope with the side effects of their addiction. Medications can help immensely with anxiety and insomnia, can treat underlying mental disorders (cf. self-medication hypothesis, Khantzian 1997) such as depression, and can help reduce or eliminate withdrawal symptomology when withdrawing from physiologically addictive drugs. Some examples are using benzodiazepines for alcohol detoxification, which prevents delirium tremens and complications; using a slow taper of benzodiazepines or a taper of phenobarbital, sometimes including another antiepileptic agent such as gabapentin, pregabalin, or valproate, for withdrawal from barbiturates or benzodiazepines; using drugs such as baclofen to reduce cravings and propensity for relapse amongst addicts to any drug, especially effective in stimulant users, and alcoholics (in which it is nearly as effective as benzodiazepines in preventing complications); using clonidine, an alpha-agonist, and loperamide for opioid detoxification, for first-time users or those who wish to attempt an abstinence-based recovery (90% of opioid users relapse to active addiction within eight months or are multiple relapse patients); or replacing an opioid that is interfering with or destructive to a user's life, such as illicitly-obtained heroin, dilaudid, or oxycodone, with an opioid that can be administered legally, reduces or eliminates drug cravings, and does not produce a high, such as methadone or buprenorphine – opioid replacement therapy – which is the gold standard for treatment of opioid dependence in developed countries, reducing the risk and cost to both user and society more effectively than any other treatment modality (for opioid dependence), and shows the best short-term and long-term gains for the user, with the greatest longevity, least risk of fatality, greatest quality of life, and lowest risk of relapse and legal issues including arrest and incarceration.[citation needed]

In a survey of treatment providers from three separate institutions, the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors, Rational Recovery Systems and the Society of Psychologists in Addictive Behaviors, measuring the treatment provider's responses on the "Spiritual Belief Scale" (a scale measuring belief in the four spiritual characteristics of AA identified by Ernest Kurtz); the scores were found to explain 41% of the variance in the treatment provider's responses on the "Addiction Belief Scale" (a scale measuring adherence to the disease model or the free-will model of addiction).[32]

Behavioral programming
Behavioral programming is considered critical in helping those with addictions achieve abstinence. From the applied behavior analysis literature and the behavioral psychology literature, several evidence based intervention programs have emerged: (1) behavioral marital therapy; (2) community reinforcement approach; (3) cue exposure therapy; and (4) contingency management strategies.[33][34] In addition, the same author suggests that social skills training adjunctive to inpatient treatment of alcohol dependence is probably efficacious. Community reinforcement has both efficacy and effectiveness data.[35] In addition, behavioral treatment such as community reinforcement and family training (CRAFT) have helped family members to get their loved ones into treatment.[36][37] Motivational intervention has also shown to be an effective treatment for substance dependence.

Alternative therapies
Alternative therapies, such as acupuncture, are used by some practitioners to alleviate the symptoms of drug addiction. In 1997, the American Medical Association (AMA) adopted, as policy, the following statement after a report on a number of alternative therapies including acupuncture:

There is little evidence to confirm the safety or efficacy of most alternative therapies. Much of the information currently known about these therapies makes it clear that many have not been shown to be efficacious. Well-designed, stringently controlled research should be done to evaluate the efficacy of alternative therapies.[38]

Treatment and issues
Medical professionals need to apply many techniques and approaches to help patients with substance related disorders. Using a psychodynamic approach is one of the techniques that psychologists use to solve addiction problems. In psychodynamic therapy, psychologists need to understand the conflicts and the needs of the addicted person, and also need to locate the defects of their ego and defense mechanisms. Using this approach alone has proven to be ineffective in solving addiction problems. Cognitive and behavioral techniques should be integrated with psychodynamic approaches to achieve effective treatment for substance related disorders.[39] Cognitive treatment requires psychologists to think deeply about what is happening in the brain of an addicted person. Cognitive psychologists should zoom in to neural functions of the brain and understand that drugs have been manipulating the dopamine reward center of the brain. From this particular state of thinking, cognitive psychologists need to find ways to change the thought process of the addicted person.[39]

Cognitive approach
There are two routes typically applied to a cognitive approach to substance abuse: tracking the thoughts that pull patients to addiction and tracking the thoughts that prevent them from relapsing. Behavioral techniques have the widest application in treating substance related disorders. Behavioral psychologists can use the techniques of "aversion therapy", based on the findings of Pavlov's classical conditioning. It uses the principle of pairing abused substances with unpleasant stimuli or conditions; for example, pairing pain, electrical shock, or nausea with alcohol consumption.[39] The use of medications may also be used in this approach, such as using disulfiram to pair unpleasant effects with the thought of alcohol use. Psychologists tend to use an integration of all these approaches to produce reliable and effective treatment. With the advanced clinical use of medications, biological treatment is now considered to be one of the most efficient interventions that psychologists may use as treatment for those with substance dependence.[39]

Medicinal approach
Another approach is to use medicines that interfere with the functions of the drugs in the brain. Similarly, one can also substitute the misused substance with a weaker, safer version to slowly taper the patient off of their dependence. Such is the case with Suboxone in the context of opioid dependence. These approaches are aimed at the process of detoxification. Medical professionals weigh the consequences of withdrawal symptoms against the risk of staying dependent on these substances. These withdrawal symptoms can be very difficult and painful times for patients. Most will have steps in place to handle severe withdrawal symptoms, either through behavioral therapy or other medications. Biological intervention should be combined with behavioral therapy approaches and other non-pharmacological techniques. Group therapies including anonymity, teamwork and sharing concerns of daily life among people who also have substance dependence issues can have a great impact on outcomes. However, these programs proved to be more effective and influential on persons who did not reach levels of serious dependence.[39]

Vaccines
TA-CD is an active vaccine[40] developed by the Xenova Group which is used to negate the effects of cocaine, making it suitable for use in treatment of addiction. It is created by combining norcocaine with inactivated cholera toxin.
TA-NIC is a proprietary vaccine in development similar to TA-CD but being used to create human anti-nicotine antibodies in a person to destroy nicotine in the human body so that it is no longer effective.[41]
History
Globe icon.
The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (February 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The phenomenon of drug addiction has occurred to some degree throughout recorded history (see "Opium").[42] Modern agricultural practices, improvements in access to drugs, advancements in biochemistry, and dramatic increases in the recommendation of drug usage by clinical practitioners have exacerbated the problem significantly in the 20th century. Improved means of active biological agent manufacture and the introduction of synthetic compounds, such as fentanyl and methamphetamine, are also factors contributing to drug addiction.[43][44]

For the entirety of US history, drugs have been used by some members of the population. In the country's early years, most drug use by the settlers was of alcohol or tobacco.[45]

The 19th century saw opium usage in the US become much more common and popular. Morphine was isolated in the early 19th century, and came to be prescribed commonly by doctors, both as a painkiller and as an intended cure for opium addiction. At the time, the prevailing medical opinion was that the addiction process occurred in the stomach, and thus it was hypothesized that patients would not become addicted to morphine if it was injected into them via a hypodermic needle, and it was further hypothesized that this might potentially be able to cure opium addiction. However, many people did become addicted to morphine. In particular, addiction to opium became widespread among soldiers fighting in the Civil War, who very often required painkillers and thus were very often prescribed morphine. Women were also very frequently prescribed opiates, and opiates were advertised as being able to relieve "female troubles".[45]

Many soldiers in the Vietnam War were introduced to heroin and developed a dependency on the substance which survived even when they returned to the US. Technological advances in travel meant that this increased demand for heroin in the US could now be met. Furthermore, as technology advanced, more drugs were synthesized and discovered, opening up new avenues to substance dependency.[45]

Society and culture
Demographics
Internationally, the U.S. and Eastern Europe contain the countries with the highest substance abuse disorder occurrence (5-6%). Africa, Asia, and the Middle East contain countries with the lowest worldwide occurrence (1-2%). Across the globe, those that tended to have a higher prevalence of substance dependence were in their twenties, unemployed, and men.[46] The National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) reports on substance dependence/abuse rates in various population demographics across the U.S. When surveying populations based on race and ethnicity in those ages 12 and older, it was observed that American Indian/Alaskan Natives were among the highest rates and Asians were among the lowest rates in comparison to other racial/ethnic groups.[47]

Substance Use in Racial/Ethnic Groups[47]
Race/Ethnicity	Dependence/Abuse Rate
Asian	4.6%
Black	7.4%
White	8.4%
Hispanic	8.6%
Mixed race	10.9%
Native Hawaiian/
Pacific Islander

11.3%
American Indian/
Alaskan Native

14.9%
When surveying populations based on gender in those ages 12 and older, it was observed that males had a higher substance dependence rate than females. However, the difference in the rates are not apparent until after age 17.[47]Drug and Alcohol Dependence reports that older adults abuse drugs including alcohol at a rate of 15-20%. It's estimated that 52 million Americans beyond 12 years old have abused a substance.[48]

Substance Use in Different Genders w/ Respect to Age[47]
Age	Male	Female
12 and older	10.8%	5.8%
12-17	5.3%	5.2%
18 or older	11.4%	5.8%
Alcohol dependence or abuse rates were shown to have no correspondence with any person's education level when populations were surveyed in varying degrees of education from ages 26 and older. However, when it came to illicit drug use there was a correlation, in which those that graduated from college had the lowest rates. Furthermore, dependence rates were greater in unemployed populations ages 18 and older and in metropolitan-residing populations ages 12 and older.[47]

Illicit Drug Dependence Demographics (Education, Employment, and Regional)[47]
Education level	Rates	Employment status	Rates	Region	Rates
high school	2.5%	un-employed	15.2%	large metropolitan	8.6%
no-degree, college	2.1%	part-time	9.3%	small metropolitan	8.4%
college graduate	0.9%	full-time	9.5%	non-metropolitan	6.6%
The National Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago reported an analysis on disparities within admissions for substance abuse treatment in the Appalachian region, which comprises 13 states and 410 counties in the Eastern part of the U.S. While their findings for most demographic categories were similar to the national findings by NSDUH, they had different results for racial/ethnic groups which varied by sub-regions. Overall, Whites were the demographic with the largest admission rate (83%), while Alaskan Native, American Indian, Pacific Islander, and Asian populations had the lowest admissions (1.8%).[49]

Legislation
Depending on the jurisdiction, addictive drugs may be legal, legal only as part of a government sponsored study, illegal to use for any purpose, illegal to sell, or even illegal to merely possess.

Most countries have legislation which brings various drugs and drug-like substances under the control of licensing systems. Typically this legislation covers any or all of the opiates, amphetamines, cannabinoids, cocaine, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, anesthetics, hallucinogenics, derivatives and a variety of more modern synthetic drugs. Unlicensed production, supply or possession is a criminal offence.

Usually, however, drug classification under such legislation is not related simply to addictiveness. The substances covered often have very different addictive properties. Some are highly prone to cause physical dependency, while others rarely cause any form of compulsive need whatsoever. Also, under legislation specifically about drugs, alcohol and nicotine are not usually included.[50]

Although the legislation may be justifiable on moral or public health grounds, it can make addiction or dependency a much more serious issue for the individual: reliable supplies of a drug become difficult to secure, and the individual becomes vulnerable to both criminal abuse and legal punishment.

It is unclear whether laws against illegal drug use do anything to stem usage and dependency. In jurisdictions where addictive drugs are illegal, they are generally supplied by drug dealers, who are often involved with organized crime. Even though the cost of producing most illegal addictive substances is very low, their illegality combined with the addict's need permits the seller to command a premium price, often hundreds of times the production cost. As a result, addicts sometimes turn to crime to support their habit.

United States
In the United States, drug policy is primarily controlled by the federal government. The Department of Justice's Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) enforces controlled substances laws and regulations. The Department of Health and Human Services' Food and Drug Administration (FDA) serve to protect and promote public health by controlling the manufacturing, marketing, and distribution of products, like medications.

The United States' approach to substance abuse has shifted over the last decade, and is continuing to change. The federal government was minimally involved in the 19th century. The federal government transitioned from using taxation of drugs in the early 20th century to criminalizing drug abuse with legislations and agencies like the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (FBN) mid-20th century in response to the nation's growing substance abuse issue.[51] These strict punishments for drug offenses shined light on the fact that drug abuse was a multi-faceted problem. The President's Advisory Commission on Narcotics and Drug Abuse of 1963 addressed the need for a medical solution to drug abuse. However, drug abuse continued to be enforced by the federal government through agencies such as the DEA and further legislations such as The Controlled Substances Act (CSA), the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, and Anti-Drug Abuse Acts.

In the past decade, there have been growing efforts through state and local legislations to shift from criminalizing drug abuse to treating it as a health condition requiring medical intervention. 28 states currently allow for the establishment of needle exchanges. Florida, Iowa, Missouri and Arizona all introduced bills to allow for the establishment of needle exchanges in 2019. These bills have grown in popularity across party lines since needle exchanges were first introduced in Amsterdam in 1983.[52] In addition, AB-186 Controlled substances: overdose prevention program was introduced to operate safe injection sites in the City and County of San Francisco. The bill was vetoed on September 30, 2018, by California Governor Jerry Brown.[53] The legality of these sites are still in discussion, so there are no such sites in the United States yet. However, there is growing international evidence for successful safe injection facilities.

Alcohol dependence is a previous (DSM-IV and ICD-10) psychiatric diagnosis in which an individual is physically or psychologically dependent upon alcohol (also chemically known as ethanol).

In 2013, it was reclassified as alcohol use disorder in DSM-5,[1] which combined alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse into this diagnosis.


Contents
1	Definition
1.1	Diagnosis
1.1.1	DSM: Alcohol dependence
1.1.2	Other alcohol-related disorders
1.2	Screening
1.2.1	AUDIT
1.2.2	CAGE
1.2.3	SADQ
2	Withdrawal
2.1	Mild
2.2	Severe
3	Treatment
4	Epidemiology
5	History
6	See also
7	Notes
8	External links
Definition
Addiction and dependence glossary[2][3][4][5]
addiction – a biopsychosocial disorder characterized by persistent use of drugs (including alcohol) despite substantial harm and adverse consequences
addictive drug – psychoactive substances that with repeated use are associated with significantly higher rates of substance use disorders, due in large part to the drug's effect on brain reward systems
dependence – an adaptive state associated with a withdrawal syndrome upon cessation of repeated exposure to a stimulus (e.g., drug intake)
drug sensitization or reverse tolerance – the escalating effect of a drug resulting from repeated administration at a given dose
drug withdrawal – symptoms that occur upon cessation of repeated drug use
physical dependence – dependence that involves persistent physical–somatic withdrawal symptoms (e.g., fatigue and delirium tremens)
psychological dependence – dependence that involves emotional–motivational withdrawal symptoms (e.g., dysphoria and anhedonia)
reinforcing stimuli – stimuli that increase the probability of repeating behaviors paired with them
rewarding stimuli – stimuli that the brain interprets as intrinsically positive and desirable or as something to approach
sensitization – an amplified response to a stimulus resulting from repeated exposure to it
substance use disorder – a condition in which the use of substances leads to clinically and functionally significant impairment or distress
tolerance – the diminishing effect of a drug resulting from repeated administration at a given dose
vte
Diagnosis
See also: Alcohol abuse § Diagnosis, and Alcoholism § Diagnosis
DSM: Alcohol dependence
According to the DSM-IV criteria for alcohol dependence, at least three out of seven of the following criteria must be manifest during a 12-month period:

Tolerance
Withdrawal symptoms or clinically defined alcohol withdrawal syndrome
Use in larger amounts or for longer periods than intended
Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down on alcohol use
Time is spent obtaining alcohol or recovering from effects
Social, occupational and recreational pursuits are given up or reduced because of alcohol use
Use is continued despite knowledge of alcohol-related harm (physical or psychological)[6]
Other alcohol-related disorders
Because only 3 of the 7 DSM-IV criteria for alcohol dependence are required, not all patients meet the same criteria and therefore not all have the same symptoms and problems related to drinking. Not everyone with alcohol dependence, therefore, experiences physiological dependence. Alcohol dependence is differentiated from alcohol abuse by the presence of symptoms such as tolerance and withdrawal. Both alcohol dependence and alcohol abuse are sometimes referred to by the less specific term alcoholism. However, many definitions of alcoholism exist, and only some are compatible with alcohol abuse. There are two major differences between alcohol dependence and alcoholism as generally accepted by the medical community.

Alcohol dependence refers to an entity in which only alcohol is the involved addictive agent. Alcoholism refers to an entity in which alcohol or any cross-tolerant addictive agent is involved.
In alcohol dependence, reduction of alcohol, as defined within DSM-IV, can be attained by learning to control the use of alcohol. That is, a client can be offered a social learning approach that helps them to 'cope' with external pressures by re-learning their pattern of drinking alcohol. In alcoholism, patients are generally not presumed to be 'in remission' unless they are abstinent from alcohol.
The following elements are the template for which the degree of dependence is judged:

Narrowing of the drinking repertoire.
Increased salience of the need for alcohol over competing needs and responsibilities.
An acquired tolerance to alcohol.
Withdrawal symptoms.
Relief or avoidance of withdrawal symptoms by further drinking.
Subjective awareness of compulsion to drink.
Reinstatement after abstinence.[7]
Screening
See also: Alcohol abuse § Screening
AUDIT has replaced older screening tools such as CAGE but there are many shorter alcohol screening tools,[8] mostly derived from the AUDIT. The Severity of Alcohol Dependence Questionnaire (SAD-Q) is a more specific twenty-item inventory for assessing the presence and severity of alcohol dependence.

AUDIT
The Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) is considered the most accurate alcohol screening tool for identifying potential alcohol misuse, including dependence.[9] It was developed by the World Health Organisation, designed initially for use in primary healthcare settings with supporting guidance.[10]

CAGE
The CAGE questionnaire, the name of which is an acronym of its four questions, is a widely used method of screening for alcoholism.

Online version of the CAGE questionnaire
SADQ
The Severity of Alcohol Dependence Questionnaire (SADQ or SAD-Q) is a 20 item clinical screening tool designed to measure the presence and level of alcohol dependence.[11]

Withdrawal
Withdrawals from alcohol dependence is a common side effect that occurs when a person with the dependency stops drinking abruptly or even cuts back on their drinking after a prolonged period of indulgence. Withdrawal from alcohol dependence can vary from mild, moderate to severe, depending on several factors such as: how long the person has been drinking, are they a binge drinker, do they relapse chronically, how much do they drink daily. All these factors can vary from one person to the next depending on psychological, environmental, and biological factors.[12] Some common withdrawal side effects are as listed:

Mild
Nausea
Vomiting
Rapid heartbeat
Elevated blood pressure
Fatigue
Body aches / tremors
Anxiety / Irritability / Depression
Fuzzy brain
Issues with sleeping
Severe

Hallucinations from alcohol withdrawal.
Vomiting
Hypertensive crisis
Seizures / Tremors
Delusions / Hallucinations
Dehydration
Fever
Chills / Shakes
Extreme mood lability
Mental pandemonium
Little to no appetite
The spectrum of alcohol withdrawal symptoms range from such minor symptoms as insomnia and tremulousness to severe complications such as withdrawal seizures and delirium tremens.[13] Alcohol withdrawal syndrome can be very tricky to diagnose, due to other preliminary conditions that may exist from individual to individual.

Treatment
Treatments for alcohol dependence can be separated into two groups, those directed towards severely alcohol-dependent people, and those focused for those at risk of becoming dependent on alcohol. Treatment for alcohol dependence often involves utilizing relapse prevention, support groups, psychotherapy,[14] and setting short-term goals.[15] The Twelve-Step Program is also a popular faith-based process used by those wishing to recover from alcohol dependence.[16]

The ultimate goal when it comes to treating alcohol dependence or as the DSM-5 now calls it alcohol use disorder, is to help with establishing abstinence from drinking. There are several other benefits that come along with treatment. For some, it is reconnecting with themselves and obtaining self-esteem and confidence, a healthier lifestyle (physically and mentally), creating new relationships with other like-minded people as well as rekindling or mending old relationships if possible. The treatment process consists typically of two parts short-term and long-term. First, there is the path to abstinence and/or recovery. There are several reasons why someone with alcohol use disorder or alcohol dependency would seek treatment. This can either be a personal reason or because of law enforcement. There is a series of different levels of treatment processes depending on the severity subtype. Some would or could benefit from medication treatment with psychosocial treatment, while others could just benefit from psychosocial treatment. Listed below are different some different types of treatments that are used with treating alcohol dependency/alcohol use disorder depending on several factors that vary from person to person.[17]


Treatment and support
Types of treatments:

Withdrawals (no medication aid needed)
Withdrawals (depending on severity of symptoms, could be accompanied with supervision by medical personal and medication)
Psychosocial treatment (counseling, CBT, psychoeducation, assertive community treatment)
Alcoholics Anonymous
Inpatient or outpatient programs
Social services (case management)
Al-Anon/Alateen
Epidemiology

"The Drunkard's Progress", 1846
About 12% of American adults have had an alcohol dependence problem at some time in their life.[18] In the UK the NHS estimates that around 9% of men and 4% of UK women show signs of alcohol dependence.[19]

History
The term 'alcohol dependence' has replaced 'alcoholism' as a term in order that individuals do not internalize the idea of cure and disease, but can approach alcohol as a chemical they may depend upon to cope with outside pressures.

The contemporary definition of alcohol dependence is still based upon early research. There has been considerable scientific effort over the past several decades to identify and understand the core features of alcohol dependence.[20] This work began in 1976, when the British psychiatrist Griffith Edwards and his American colleague Milton M. Gross [21] collaborated to produce a formulation of what had previously been understood as 'alcoholism' – the alcohol dependence syndrome.

The alcohol dependence syndrome was seen as a cluster of seven elements that concur. It was argued that not all elements may be present in every case, but the picture is sufficiently regular and coherent to permit clinical recognition. The syndrome was also considered to exist in degrees of severity rather than as a categorical absolute. Thus, the proper question is not 'whether a person is dependent on alcohol', but 'how far along the path of dependence has a person progressed'.

A dependant is a person who relies on another as a primary source of income. A common-law spouse who is financially supported by their partner may also be included in this definition.[1] In some jurisdictions, supporting a dependant may enable the provider to claim a tax deduction.

In the United Kingdom, a full-time student in higher education who financially supports another adult may qualify for an Adult Dependant's Grant.[2]

Taxation
In the US, a taxpayer may claim exemptions for their dependants.

the situation in which you need something or someone all the time, especially in order to continue existing or operating:
The company needs to reduce its dependence on just one particular product.
Drug dependence led to her early death.
She has developed a deep dependence on him (= she needs him emotionally).
 More examples
The region's complete dependence on tourism is rather worrying.
All her life she had a childlike dependence on the people around her.
Gradually her dependence on alcohol became obvious to everyone.
After living alone for so long, she found the baby's dependence on her quite difficult to cope with.
He had to learn that dependence on others is not a sign of weakness.


the state of relying on or needing someone or something for aid, support, or the like.
reliance; confidence; trust:
Her complete reliability earned her our dependence.
an object of reliance or trust.
the state of being conditional or contingent on something, as through a natural or logical sequence:
the dependence of an effect upon a cause.
the state of being psychologically or physiologically dependent on a drug after a prolonged period of use.
subordination or subjection:
the dependence of Martinique upon France.

Principales traductions
Anglais		Français
dependency n	(reliance: on [sb]) (à l'égard de [qqn])	dépendance nf
 	The country's foreign oil dependency is rising.
dependency on [sb] n	(reliance on [sb]) (à une personne)	dépendance à nf + prép
 	The kittens' dependency on their mother lasts only a few weeks.
 	La dépendance des chatons à leur mère ne dure que quelques semaines.
dependency n	(drugs, alcohol: addiction) (aux drogues, à l'alcool)	dépendance nf
 	The drug rehab program helps people manage their dependency.
 	Le programme de désintoxication aide les gens à gérer leur dépendance.
dependency on [sth] n	(addiction to [sth]) (au chocolat, au sucre,...)	dépendance à nf + prép
 	He has not been very successful fighting his dependency on drink.
 	Il n'a pas réussi à battre sa dépendance à l'alcool.
 	Un oubli important ? Signalez une erreur ou suggérez une amélioration.

WordReference English-French Dictionary © 2023:

Formes composées
Anglais		Français
codependency,
co-dependency n	(couple's mutual reliance)	co-dépendance nf

Think about your favorite candy bar and imagine eating one; you've just demonstrated the concept of use. Now imagine eating so many candy bars that you get sick; you've just demonstrated what is called abuse. Finally, imagine eating so many candy bars that you are diagnosed with diabetes and then imagine you still continue to eat them; you've just demonstrated what is referred to as dependence. Substance dependence can be defined as continuing to use a substance even though negative consequences result from doing it.

Why are some people able to use drugs a few times and then walk away while others continue to use despite repeated marital problems, health problems, and sometimes even imprisonment? Why do some people continue to do the same behavior even when it causes them trouble? The answer is commonly referred to as addiction.

Jung Quote
Remember the first time you ever touched a flame? The fire was hot, it probably burned you, and you learned not to do it again (hopefully). For substance-dependent individuals, although they get burned, they are unable to stop themselves from sticking their hands in the fire again … and again … and again. Seems to defy common sense, doesn't it? That's because you got burned the first time you did it. What if the first time you put your hand in a flame it felt great instead of burning? You'd be more likely to try it again, right?

Quiz Course 4.6K views
Dependence
Therein lies the problem with substance dependence: you're not dependent on the drug right away. Over time, you develop a tolerance until one day you barely receive any reward at all. You remember how good it used to feel and you keep trying to recapture that first high. You may even start noticing withdrawal effects when you stop using. You have become substance dependent.

Tolerance - Behaviorism teaches that the more times you do a behavior and receive a reward; the more likely you are to try it again. Even if the reward is eventually removed, you will still continue doing the behavior hoping that the reward will return. When someone uses alcohol or illegal drugs, their body is rewarded; they get 'high.' When the reward begins to diminish, the substance abuser increases the amount of alcohol or drugs they use to achieve the same level of reward. This is referred to as tolerance.

Withdrawal - Sometimes substance dependent individuals use alcohol or drugs long enough that they develop a physiological need for their drug of choice. When this happens, not using the substance can produce unpleasant effects such as vomiting, shakes, tremors, diarrhea, and hallucinations. The symptoms that result from not taking the substance are called withdrawal effects.

Using More - Buying a larger quantity of something because it is more economical with the intention of saving part of it for later makes good financial sense. When an alcoholic or drug user habitually does this and then ends up using more of the substance than he or she intended, it is often a sign of dependence. An example would be going to the local tavern to have one or two beers and then, ten drinks later, deciding it's finally time to go home.

Persistent Desire - Sometimes alcoholics and drug addicts have the best of intentions about quitting, however, after a period of abstinence they find themselves thinking more and more about using again. Finally, unable to resist their thoughts any longer, they succumb to the temptation and begin drinking or using again. The period of abstinence may last days, weeks, months, or may only last an hour or two. The common denominator is an overwhelming desire to use or drink again.

Excessive Time - When someone first starts drinking alcohol or using drugs, it is usually only on specific occasions and often for short periods of time. Eventually the substance use occupies more and more of the individual's life. At some point, the dependent person finds themselves spending a good portion of his or her day either looking for the substance (making a drug buy), using the substance (time spent getting drunk or high), or recovering from the effects of the substance use (sleeping it off).

Important Activities - One of the signs of substance dependence is when using the substance becomes more important to the individual than other activities that he or she used to consider important. Examples can include not spending as much time playing with the children because his or her time is now spent using, missing work because the person is hung-over or recovering from the effects of substance use, and no longer exercising because there is not enough time in the day to both use drugs and to exercise.

Anthropologist Elinor Ochs and her colleagues at the University of California, Los Angeles have studied family life as far away as Samoa and the Peruvian Amazon region, but for the last decade they have focused on a society closer to home: the American middle class.


Why do American children depend on their parents to do things for them that they are capable of doing for themselves? How do U.S. working parents' views of "family time" affect their stress levels? These are just two of the questions that researchers at UCLA's Center on Everyday Lives of Families, or CELF, are trying to answer in their work.

[pullquote]

By studying families at home—or, as the scientists say, "in vivo"—rather than in a lab, they hope to better grasp how families with two working parents balance child care, household duties and career, and how this balance affects their health and well-being.


The center, which also includes sociologists, psychologists and archeologists, wants to understand "what the middle class thought, felt and what they did," says Ochs. The researchers plan to publish two books this year on their work, and say they hope the findings may help families become closer and healthier.

Ten years ago, the UCLA team recorded video for a week of nearly every moment at home in the lives of 32 Southern California families. They have been picking apart the footage ever since, scrutinizing behavior, comments and even their refrigerator's contents for clues.

The families, recruited primarily through ads, owned their own homes and had two or three children, at least one of whom was between 7 and 12 years old. About a third of the families had at least one nonwhite member, and two were headed by same-sex couples. Each family was filmed by two cameras and watched all day by at least three observers.


Among the findings: The families had very a child-centered focus, which may help explain the "dependency dilemma" seen among American middle-class families, says Ochs. Parents intend to develop their children's independence, yet raise them to be relatively dependent, even when the kids have the skills to act on their own, she says.

In addition, these parents tended to have a very specific, idealized way of thinking about family time, says Tami Kremer-Sadlik, a former CELF research director who is now the director of programs for the division of social sciences at UCLA. These ideals appeared to generate guilt when work intruded on family life, and left parents feeling pressured to create perfect time together. The researchers noted that the presence of the observers may have altered some of the families' behavior.

Click here to read more on this story from the Wall Street Journal. 

THE IDEA OF OVERSHARING
Our parents come from a generation where compulsive lying to parents was the norm. However, the millennial generation is quite open about experiences.

Letting parents know of their whereabouts, the constant check through social media and blurring of boundaries between children and parents has resulted in this over-dependence.

Information on dating, drinking, partying is now readily available to the millennial parent and doesn’t need to be extracted.

THE REALISATION THAT INDEPENDENCE IS A STRUGGLE
Living at home might come with some restrictions like abiding by time, but there is a realisation that there is no place like home. Children who have stayed in hostels or alone at any point in time, realise that with independence comes great responsibility to take care of themselves and their needs. Home is where everyone is pampered and things are done for them.

COMFORT OF THE FAMILIAR
One reason for this dependence could also be the idea of ‘familiarity‘. Home is a space which is known to us. Our parents know us inside out, our likes and dislikes.

Our homes are the safest places to be at. Letting go of that safety net automatically rids us of that comfort of the familiar.


FEAR OF ‘ADULTING’ 
One of the most common terms used to describe what the millennial generation is doing is ‘adulting‘. The word essentially means to behave more like an ‘adult‘ with actual grown-up responsibilities.

However, there is an underlying fear in the minds of the millennials to carry out ‘adulting‘. The very thought of having to face real-world problems and multitask seems daunting. Dependency on parents, cures us of that fear, even if it is done temporarily.

THE TAKEN-FOR-GRANTED PARENT
Overprotective parents display a trait of being a part of every aspect of the child’s life. This overprotectiveness makes the child more and more dependent on the parent.

If the parent restricts the child from fighting his/her own battles and is available at every beck and call, the parent is taken for granted and only makes it harder for the child to be more independent in the future. 

Belonging to this very millennial generation, I relate to all the things I stated above. I want the ‘independent’ experience as much as the next person, but within the comfort of my current life, where real struggles haven’t yet surfaced.

I too am dependent on my parents for just about everything. I have to be told repeatedly to apply cream after a shower, to keep my clothes properly stacked and to clean my spectacles periodically.

It’s not like I don’t know that I have to do all these things, it’s just easier when someone else has to remind us to do what we have to. Who better to do that, than our parents?

God created us to have a healthy reliance on our spouses, friends, and even authority figures (like a pastor or spiritual leader). These respectful relationships help us live in the fullness of Christ.

But sometimes individuals may fall into an unhealthy reliance on others which violates God’s design for dependency.


One of these unhealthy scenarios is parent-to-child dependency.

By God’s design, children rely on their parents. Parents meet the needs of the child. But when a parent becomes dependent upon a child, God’s plan gets perverted. I’ve seen this kind of family structure create enormous problems.

First, please understand I’m not referring to an older parent who becomes incapacitated and must rely on assistance from an adult child. This kind of care from a grown child toward a parent is not only compassionate, but perfectly appropriate.

What I’m referring to is a dangerous scenario where school-aged children—or even younger!—are relied upon to meet a parent’s emotional needs.

For example, these days we often hear of teenagers getting pregnant simply because they want someone to love them. So a young girl will bring a baby into the world, expecting this child to make her feel special and always be there for her.

This is a corruption of God’s plan. It stunts a child’s emotional development, because it often forces children to parent their mom or dad before the child is equipped physically, psychologically, or spiritually to do so.

It makes kids bear responsibility for maintaining a peaceful house or keeping their parents on the right track. When these efforts fail, the kids take the blame.


This is a form of emotional abuse. It results in broken, relationally impaired adults—which impact these children’s future relationships and marriages.

When children leave a home in which they’ve been an emotional prop for their parents, the parents lose a sense of security. They then pursue their children into adulthood and marriage. Dependent parents can become adversarial with their child’s spouse. They can compete for love and attention.

It goes without saying that this makes a relationship with a future spouse very difficult. Problem in-laws begin with unhealthy dependencies on children.

When an adult tries to fill a void in his or her life through children or grandchildren, families can be damaged. We need to find our primary fulfillment in God. We need to find our secondary fulfillment in our spouses and our friends.

Please understand this: You cannot expect your children to fix what is wrong with you! Attempting to do so prohibits your kids from properly developing as children.

“When I was a child, I talked like a child, I thought like a child, I reasoned like a child. When I became a man, I put childish ways behind me” (1 Cor. 13:11). The distinction is clear. Kids need to be kids, and adults need to be adults.

God has put us in our children’s lives to be role models for them, to train them properly according to God’s design. This means loving them and serving them—but not depending upon them to meet our needs. Let them depend on you, then show them what a healthy marriage and relationship with God looks like.

The causes of childhood overweight are numerous and inter-related. The mother-child relationship is of great significance for the child’s health. Previous studies have found patterns of dysfunctional interaction in families with obese children. Therefore, development of childhood overweight could be due to the mother-child relationship. The aim of this study was to investigate how, and to what degree, the mother-child relationship, assessed by the mothers, was related to overweight among children aged seven to nine years. The study was a cross sectional case-controlled one. It included 111 overweight and 149 non-overweight seven to nine year old children and their mothers. Weight status was determined according to the International Obesity Task Force reference for children Body Mass Index, age and gender adjusted. An interviewer-administered questionnaire was used to categorize the mother-child relationship as: complementary, asymmetrical, symmetrical or symbiotic prototypes. There was no difference in mother-child relationships – characterized by the prototypes – between the overweight and non-overweight mother-child pairs. Therefore, we conclude that the mother-child relationship has no bearing on the child’s weight status according to the prototypes. It is suggested that it is more the culture, or the universal phenomenon of expressing love through food, than the mother-child relationship, which influences the development of childhood overweight, or that the mothers are not capable of assess the true attachment style between themselves and their children.

Key words: childhood overweight, attachment, bonding, mother-child relationship, children
Go to:
Introduction
The trend of overweight and obesity is particularly alarming in children and adolescents and is a worldwide public health concern.1 Being overweight in childhood have numerous and inter-related causes,2 e.g. have studies found poor quality of the early maternal-child relationship to be associated with higher prevalence of adolescent obesity.2,3 Thus, the social-emotional climate in the homes of children and young people matters as attachment and bonding in families have been shown to decrease children’ episodes of overeating.4 Attachment security reflects the development of children’s emotion regulation and stress response, where children are less likely to avoid conversing about negative feelings when they are in secure attachment and when mothers acknowledge the perspective of the child.5 However, characteristic dysfunctional pattern of interaction are found in families with obese children.4,6 For instance, children with difficult temperament and insensitive mothers were found to have significantly higher risk of being overweight or obese during school age,7 as well as children in families with mealtime challenges, maternal distress and family conflicts.8 Among infants and toddlers, parents may over-feed difficult children in a misunderstanding of being good parents and in an effort to calm or reduce the children emotional intensity.9 Therefore, the mother-child relationship is of great significance for the child’s health, since one … does not have relations but is in one’s relations, in the sense that the relations decide what situations we must and can find ourselves in.10 For the child, the mother is a significant other, and the basic conditions for the mother-child relationship are mutual trust and love, where the child’s understanding of individual processes, such as reflection, feelings and values are fundamental.

This relationship has the greatest influence on the child’s self-confidence and it is essential to the way in which the mother acts, supports the child’s needs, organizes the surroundings for the child’s development, and how she herself interacts,10 and is ultimately essential to the child’s competence to engage in relationships with other people.11,12 The intellectual and emotional bonds are crucial to the quality and character of the relationship between mother and child. In the same way that different people find a particular significance in the relationships they engage in, this one gets its special meaning from the context within which it unfolds. The context determines the opportunities and limitations of the relationship, based on its character and the quality of the conditions that the context sets for its development.10 Therefore, development of childhood overweight may be due to the mother-child relationship.

Theoretical framework for mother-child relationship
Based on Bowlby and Ainsworth’s theory and empiricism on relationships, bonding and attachment the Danish psychologist Flemming Andersen describes relationships and communication in four distinct ways as prototypes.13-16 They influence the child’s way of being seen, treated and developed, in relation to self-confidence, self-determination, behavior and lifestyle. The four prototype relations are: the asymmetric, the symmetric, the symbiotic and the complementary (Figure 1).10 The asymmetrical, or the power-twisted, relationship is characterized by a strong dependency and is without equality; in practice the mother decides what the child should think and do. There will be a battle for power with a perpetual series of arguments (attempts at emancipation) and reconciliation (the reconfirmation of dependency). The symmetrical, or the parallel, relationship is characterized by an insufficient, mutual but dependent relation between mother and child, marked by ambivalence. The symbiotic, or the confluent, relationship is characterized by the two parties having difficulty understanding that they each have a particular position in the relationship (diffusion); this results in a confusion of needs, roles and responsibilities. The complementary, or mutually acknowledging, relationship is characterized by the presence of both dialectical communication and mutual recognition of each individual’s identity, integrity and freedom. This relationship is the optimal one, and is deemed the most appropriate for the child’s development and behavior.10,17

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
Object name is hpr-2014-2-1583-g001.jpg
Figure 1.
Illustrations of the four prototypes.

The attachment style is based on regulation. Thus, determines the attachment style the maternal sensitivity in reading the infant’s signals and deliver a prompt, adequate and consistent response,12,14 i.e. an appropriate management strategy to regulate what she has read. A secure attachment style has its roots in a sensitive mother who has tools to contain and reduce an emotional insensitivity from the child.14 In contrast if the mother is missing such tools and does not know how to contain the emotional intensitivity of the child, she could choose to give the child food, since food normally is a successful tool of calming. In this way regulation with food begins in infancy and could continue throughout the childhood. Due to attachment patterns they are stable after the first years foundation and persist throughout life.14,18 Mothers’ who are capable of secure attachment to their children is characterized by a very nuanced and clarified approach to their own attachment relationships e.g. to their own mothers.14 According to the theory of relationship and attachment theory, attachment styles are intercultural, meaning that the mothers reactions to the children are predictable regardless of cultural setting.12,16 However, the way of interpreting the attachment styles can be different in different cultures. When the mothers pay attention and are able to interpret and handle the children’s signals and relevant needs they give the children the best conditions for development of self-confidence, autonomy and the capacity to freely explore and meet the world, in contrast to a dependent child who is not necessarily well bonded.15 However, this is a Western way of thinking which reflects broadly common Western patterns of relatedness. On the other hand people in almost all parts of the world have transitioned from a traditional way of life to incorporate western culture to some degree.19 However, Rothbaum et al.20 showed that many of the behaviors associated with the different attachment styles have different meanings in different countries and cultures. For example in a Japanese context an extremely close relationship between mother and child, characterized by absence of boundary (equivalent to Andersen’s symbiotic relation, Figure 1), is acknowledged as a sign of maturity, whereas in a Western context it would be considered as pathological and a sign of regression.20 Therefore, different goals and behaviors based on different values and experiences can serve different functions in different cultures, and differently define what an appropriate attachment style is.12 Furthermore, different parenting values and norms correspond to different behavioral parenting strategies across families and countries.12,21 Therefor the different prototype relationships are employed in this study to explore whether there is a link between the form of the mother-child relationship (assessed by the mothers), and whether or not the seven to nine year old child is overweight.

Go to:
Materials and Methods
Design
The study was a cross sectional case-control one conducted as part of an investigation of mothers’ wishes and abilities to counteract overweight among their seven to nine year old children.22,23 Mother-child pairs were recruited from The Danish National Birth Cohort (DNBC)24 established when the mothers were pregnant. Initially 101 thousand mothers were included, each having been interviewed five times in the period to the children’ seventh birthdays. When recruiting for our study, 2846 fulfilled the following criteria. Inclusion criteria: i) the biological mothers participated in all five interviews in the DNBC, ii) the children were singleton term born during 1999 and 2000, living in Denmark within the Capital Region of Copenhagen, the region of Zealand and Funen, iii) the children were categorized, either as cases or controls, according to World Health Organization and the International Obesity Task Force (IOTF) reference for children Body Mass Index (BMI), age and gender adjusted.25 This was calculated from the children’s reported height and weight at the seven-year follow-up. Cases were overweight children with BMI age and gender adjusted, corresponding to adult BMI ≥25 and controls were non-overweight children with BMI age and gender adjusted, corresponding to adult BMI <25. Exclusion criteria were: i) children with congenital diseases, malformations, syndromes or chronic diseases; ii) pre-pubescent children with physical signs of puberty,26 and iii) mothers with psychiatric diagnoses. In total 471 mother-child pairs fulfilling the above criteria were invited to participate in the study. They were made up of 241 overweight children and 230 non-overweight children and their mothers. In total 211 of those invited withdrew for reasons reported elsewhere.23 Thus, the study included 111 overweight and 149 non-overweight children, equivalent to 260 (55%) of the eligible mother-child pairs. The children were measured by the authors at mean age 8.1 years. The participants were categorized as overweight children/mothers of overweight children (MOC) and non-overweight children/mothers of non-overweight children (MNC) regardless of the mothers’ weight and BMI.

Ethics
The study received approval from The Danish National Data Protection Agency (ref. no. 2007-41-1435) and The Danish National Birth Cohort (ref. no. 2007-05). Approval from the Danish National Committee on Biomedical Research Ethics was not required under Danish Law because of the non-biomedical character of the study. However, the committee was informed (ref. no. H-D-2007-0015). The study was performed in accordance with the Ethical Guidelines for Nursing Research in the Nordic Countries,27 and the Helsinki Declaration.28 Oral and written informed consent was obtained from all mothers and children.

Methods
Since no existing questionnaire was found to cover appropriately the key aim of the study, an interviewer-administered questionnaire was developed to investigate the themes: mother-child relationship, action competence and health behavior in relation to preventing or combating childhood overweight. We only present the mother-child relationship in this article. To characterize the mother-child relation, four statements were developed in order to highlight each prototype: complementary, asymmetrical, symmetrical and symbiotic (Figure 1), thus we developed a questionnaire made up of 16 questions29 (Appendix). The chosen statements were developed through close dialogue with psychologist Flemming Andersen the originator of the prototypes. We moved from a conceptual to an operational level, where the variables that would be the subject of analysis were identified and formulated as operational questions.30,31 The statements in the questionnaire (Appendix) were randomly arranged and were posed consecutively, with the mothers asked to state whether or not they agreed with each statement.29 In addition, we asked seven questions about mother-child relationships with answer possibilities according to the principle of a Lickert scale i.e. with a natural hierarchy. All questions were formulated to be meaningful and relevant to mothers and were posed in everyday language. The questionnaire was evaluated by peers, two psychologists, senior researchers and a communication expert to achieve face and content validity.31 The interviewer-administered questionnaire was pre-tested on four mothers, and found valid.

Procedures
The interviewer-administered questionnaire for mothers was performed in most cases while the child played at the other end of the room; it was possible on occasion for the children to hear the questions posed by the researcher and the answers given by the mother. The mothers had a copy of the questionnaire in front of them. The researcher repeated the answers and the mother could see where the researcher noted the answers.

Analysis
The Pearson chi-square test or Fisher’s exact test was used to test for differences between the categorical variables. A threshold for statistical significance was set a priori at 0.05 and with 95% confidence intervals. From the questionnaire (Appendix) proxy-variables were created and allocated points: 1 point = completely agree, 2 points = partly agree, 3 points = do not agree. In order to evaluate the character of the relationship, in the subsequent analyses a cut-off point of ≤6 points was used for each category. Four mother-child pairs were initially characterized as don’t know, but with subsequent researcher triangulation they were re-categorized as diffuse. Control of input errors in the database was applied to a randomly chosen 23% of the mother-child pairs. An input error rate of 0.3% was found. Corrections were made in accordance with the original data. Double data entry was excluded because the input error rate was under 1%. The statistical analyses were performed in SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, Inc. Chicago, IL, USA) software version 16.0/17.0.

Go to:
Results
In both groups MOC and MNC the most common prototypical relationship was the complementary one. In total, 77% of the mother-child pairs showed a uniquely complementary (70%), or a mostly, complementary (7%) relationship (Table 1), both of which are considered the most appropriate form. In all, 7% of the relationships were split between complementary and asymmetrical. The 21 mothers in the category diffuse represented approximately 10% of the population.

Table 1.
Results for prototypical mother-child relationships.

Prototype*	Number of mother-child pairs
Case (n=111)	Control (n=149)	Total (n=260)
Uniquely complementary (A)	72	111	183 (70%)
Uniquely asymmetric (B)	5	6	11 (4%)
Uniquely symmetric (C)	-	-	-
Uniquely confluent (D)	-	-	-
Split between complementary (A) and asymmetric (B)	10	8	18 (7%)
Split between complementary (A) and symmetric (C)	2	2	4 (2%)
Split between complementary (A) and confluent (D)	2	-	2 (1%)
Mostly complementary (A) - not complementary	8	11	19 (7%)
Mostly asymmetric (B) - not complementary	1	1	2 (1%)
Mostly symmetric (C) - not complementary	-	-	-
Mostly confluent (D) - not complementary	-	-	-
Diffuse (not specific)	11	10	21 (8%)
Open in a separate window
*See Figure 1 for the illustration of the 4 models.

In the remaining questions we found no significant differences between MOC and MNC answers. Neither did we find differences in who the mothers most hoped the child would take after, in looks and personality, since approximately 80% of each group had never thought about it. In total 71% of both MOC and MNC already felt bonded to their children during pregnancy. Similarly, there was no difference in how bonded the mothers felt with their children at the time of the study; 95% MOC and 97% MNC responded that they felt bonded to a high degree. Likewise 77% MOC and 79% MNC considered that at the time of the study their children were most bonded to them as opposed to their fathers or others. The way MOC and MNC felt about having to take care of the children from birth to the present showed no significant difference (Table 2). However, about 20% found it hard or very hard (Table 2). MOC and MNC felt to an equal degree that they were good at interpreting their children’s signals and needs (Table 3).

Table 2.
How the mothers felt about having to take care of the children from birth to today.

Feeling	MOC (n=111) (%)	MNC (n=149) (%)	P
Very easy	41(37)	49(33)	0.130
Easy	46(41)	81(54)	0.130
Hard	22(20)	18(12)	0.130
Very hard	2(2)	1(1)	0.130
Open in a separate window
Table 3.
The extent to which mothers feel they are good/bad at interpreting their children’s signals/needs.

Extent	MOC (n=111) (%)	MNC (n=149) (%)	P
High	71(64)	98(66)	0.895
Some	36(32)	47(32)	0.895
Less	4(4)	4(3)	0.895
Open in a separate window
Go to:
Discussion
In this study, mother-child relationships, characterized by prototypes (Figure 1) showed no pattern as to whether the children were overweight or not, since there was no significant difference between the two groups (MOC and MNC). The uniquely or mostly complementary relationship, i.e. the more equal one, is that where the mother respects the child in the child’s space and recognizes the child in relation to its development.10,16 This prototype was represented by more than 2/3 of MOC and MNC and their children. This finding is supported by Ainsworths work,16 as well as other studies,15 which also found the complementary relationship to be the most frequent form of association (55-65%). However that is without bearing any relation to the child’s weight status. A study of family stress and BMI in young children identified attachment styles, but they did not find an independent association between attachment style and overweight, even though they found a statistically significant association between high scores on Swedish Parenthood Stress Questionnaire (SPSQ) and overweight with an odds ratio of 4.61.32 This could indicate that the inter-familiar culture with maternal stress level is more predictive of childhood overweight than attachment styles.

MOC and MNC stated they felt bonded to the child as early as in pregnancy. This was strengthened by time, as seven years later nearly all the mothers felt closely bonded to their children. Interestingly, Andersen and Whitaker in an American population found obesity to be associated with many of the same covariates as insecurely attached children.3 They found children’s attachment security at two years of age and the risk of obesity at 4.5 year of age to be 1.3 times higher for the insecurely attached children than for the children with secure attachment.3 Other studies have shown a 75-85% stability in the bonding pattern around one year of age,15 which underpins the fact that the mothers’ bond and relationship with their children is not exclusively an expression of momentary validity but is of manifest character.

The complementary bond was further underpinned in findings from an in-depth interview, where the mothers described a great togetherness, a very close, good, loving and harmonious relationship with their children.33,34 In contrast, Schwartz and Puhl report that parents’ negative attitude to overweight children can mean that they communicate stereotypical expectations about weight to their children at home, which affects the children’s self-esteem and may contribute to stigmatization.35 However, the MOC and MNC with a uniquely complementary mother-child relation generally have a dialogue-based method of bringing up their children. This is in accordance with the convention on children’s rights, where the children have the right to influence over their own lives and learning.36 Since the relationships are laid down early and are characterized by the context,15 and since we are our relations in life, relationships with other people are the most significant factor in a person’s life and consciousness,10 regardless of development phase or age. In contrast to that, our findings regarding the overall mother-child relation show no distinction between MOC and MNC and their children, Trombini et al.37 from Germany found a significant difference in the insecure attachment style of mothers of obese children compared to mothers of non-overweight children. Additionally, Pott and colleagues from Italy,38 showed that overweight children with an avoidant attachment attitude, should be provided with special support intervention. Furthermore two studies by Lissau and Sørensen,39 and Whitaker et al.40 found an increased risk of childhood overweight when the parents themselves or teachers reported neglectful behavior in the parents. There are no findings in our study that would suggest bonding problems for the overweight children or that they were neglected. However, our findings do suggest that the mother-child relationship, categorized according to Andersen’s prototypes, does not influence the children’s BMI, which points in the same direction as a study by Bennett et al.,41 who find similar BMI in neglected and comparable children of age 7-9. The studies that found an association are either rather old or from other countries, which could suggest that time or culture could influence the outcome.

This is supported by a new study of Kocken et al.,42 who found ethnic differences between the parental beliefs of prevention and management of their children’ overweight to be essential, and they therefore advice future interventions to pay attention to cultural aspects of the targeted group.42 So fare interventions have mostly focused on what Resnicow et al.43 describes as surface structure where interventions mostly fit the language and cultural aspect of the target group more than deep structure interventions with a psychological and social-cultural approach to childhood overweight.43 Furthermore, future change of population complexity with increase of different ethnic minorities within different countries will endorse multicultural in deep structure focus.18 When it comes to how the mothers experienced the way they have taken care of their children from birth to now and how they look upon themselves as caregivers no difference were found between MOC and MNC. The finding reflects the mothers’ attention, attitude and capacity to read, interpret and act on their children’s signals and needs, as essential to the complementary form of association and to the quality of the relationship.15

This is the Western way of thinking, thus, as mentioned in the theoretical framework section the Japanese approach to mother-child attachment and family relations could just as well be the best and most desirable practice. However, the Japanese approach to bonding and relationships has no more favorable impact on the childhood overweight problem since the prevalence of overweight and obesity in Japanese children is high,1 showing increasing trends and tracking effect.44,45 On the other hand this bonding approach could also be the reason for a higher prevalence of childhood overweight. Thus, childhood overweight should also have been an issue in Japan before the overweight and obesity epidemic became a worldwide public health concern. In the same way as in Japan, Chinese culture emphasizes interdependence rather than and independence.18,46 Even though Hong Kong is a heavily Westernized city food and bonding have a strong place in Chinese culture.46 Where expressing love through food is common in parents and grandparents and in all families serving and receiving food bond the giver and receiver in the family context.46 In this way relationship is tied to food and is important in families.46 Food is not only important in an Asian culture, it is essential for human beings existence and therefore of great significance for people in all cultures worldwide, no matter if the approach for the individual/family are eating for living or living for eating. Despite the mothers expression of being more bonded to their children than their fathers or others and a good relationship between mother and child the underlying attachment style could be of importance. A possibility is, that it is easy for the mothers to feed and over-feed the children,9 since feeding it is a extension of the infancy relation with breastfeeding and in many cultures worldwide is the home and food still the woman’s domain. Furthermore, when the mothers believe they read their children’ signals well without doing it, it could be related to challenges for the mothers in setting limits to the children or being worried that limits might give the children an experience of not being accepted, or feel themselves they are bad parents for not giving their children a good time e.g. eating all the food they want.47 Finally, bodily unrest in the children, could also be related to feelings that are unconscious, resulting in a feeling of hunger and eating behavior.

If the relationship between the mother-child is not based on a dialectical communication and the mother do not read and adjust the child appropriately, it could be due to transference of an intergenerational attachment style.48,49 Where the mother interpret it as normal behavior when using food as regulation based on maternal characteristics, history and experiences and then placing her child at risk for various social, psychological and health problems,48 such as overweight. In addition, many mothers do not see their children’s overweight;23,50,51 and this could also be due to regulation difficulties or neglect.39 Neglect is an example of strong defense which is inappropriate and prevent the mothers’ reading the child sensitively and regulating the signals relevant. However, the mothers could be sensitive but have difficult children who are specially sensitive themselves or temperamental and therefore specially difficult to down regulate e.g. regarding food.7,9 Such micro-mechanisms are not investigated in our study.

All this discussed above could suggest that it is more the culture or the universal phenomenon expressing love through food than the mother-child prototype relationship which influences the development of childhood overweight, or that the mothers are not capable of assess the true attachment style between themselves and their children.

Limitations
The results are based on the mothers’ perception of their relationship to their children. Maybe this is not a strong enough predictor to determine the actual relationship, if all mothers wish to have and appear to have the best relationship with their children. In this way the mothers’ perception of bonding is so strong as to override the problem of overweight. We cannot exclude the possibility that there are emotional relations that the theory and our data collection instruments do not capture and which the mothers are not aware of. If we had used a different theoretical framework from Flemming Andersen’s, it is possible that our results would have pointed in another direction. However Andersen’s theory is based on Bowlby and Ainsworth’s theories on bonding and attachment,10,11 which are widely embedded in other theories on relations and are acknowledged worldwide. However, there are some associated uncertainties e.g. do they capture the same results when the theories are conceptualized and operationalized? Furthermore, the mothers were interviewed while the children were playing in the other end of the room, therefore it is possible they would only say positive things regarding the child and how they get along together. It could be connected to a taboo and therefore difficult for the mothers to admit that their relation to their children is not perfect. It could be embarrassing for them or they could fear being judged as losers. Thus, a possibility is that the mothers’ answers are too positive about their relationship with their children. Such positive answers could be used to position themselves morally as good mothers, as they could assume that their overweight child’s body is a highly visible sign of their bad motherhood.52 At a time when childhood overweight is often presented as the new scourge of modern civilization parents of overweight children are currently under heavy criticism among the general public, the media and politicians.52 In addition, the mothers were selected over seven years, which could indicate that they represented a resource full group with strong mother-child relations. However, 21 (10%) represented a diffuse relation, which is in line with the background population. To improve the reliability of data on whether or not childhood overweight is dependent on the mother-child relationship would require controlled clinical studies based on direct observation of the communication, interactions and attachment between mother and child.4 However, carrying out such observation for days at a time is very invasive, especially since families with young children and working parents are already under all kinds of pressure and have little time to spend together. Yet observations for a couple of hours at a time are probably not exhaustive enough to get a more valid outcome.52 Hence, it would be interesting, and a possible predictor for the association of mother-child relationship and attachment, to carry out a Strange Situation Test, when the children are ten months old and the Adult Interview when the children are nine years old.15

Go to:
Conclusions
The prototype relationship between mother and child was not a significant predictor for whether the children were overweight or not. There was nothing to suggest that the overweight children were neglected or that they had worse relationships with their mothers than the non-overweight ones. The majority of both cases: children/MOC and control children/MNC had a uniquely or mostly complementary association form and relation, which, seen from a Western perspective is considered as the most appropriate mother-child relationship. This type of relationship is commendable and an important foundation for the children’s development. Therefore is it important that health professionals (doctors, general practitioners, nurses, health visitors, psychologist and others) continue to pay attention to the mother-child relationship. It is suggested that it is more the culture or the universal phenomenon expressing love through food than the mother-child prototype relation which influences the development of childhood overweight, or that the mothers are not capable of assess the true attachment style between themselves and their children. However more investigation into what leads to overweight are needed. We need more precise concepts and sufficient methods to gain in depth knowledge about mother-child relationships in the context of childhood overweight. More knowledge in this area could lead to completely new possibilities for prevention and treatment of childhood overweight, which is very necessary.

A couple of months ago, I made the decision to end my financial dependence on my mother.

I had on eighty-four cents in my bank account, no place to live and the only income I had was from a part time job and a couple of freelance projects.

Though the timing may have been a bit dramatic, there was a sense of urgency in my decision. I was desperate to free myself from the cycle of repeatedly leaving home only to return with my tail between my legs and no money to speak of.

Each time I came home, my mother would offer to pay my bills and I would accept though we both secretly resented it.

I realized that I wasn’t living up to my greatest potential because I didn’t have to. I never stuck with anything for very long because I knew my mother would always be there to bail me out if I failed. When things became too difficult, boring or routine I could quit.

I did quit.

Not only was I taking advantage of her, I was sabotaging my own growth and personal development.

Establishing my financial independence from my mother meant no longer accepting her offers of assistance. It also meant pursuing my writing career in earnest to generate additional income. I walked the three miles to or from work to save money on gas and transit passes.

I slept on a terribly uncomfortable futon in someone else’s living room. At times, I didn’t eat for several days until my next paycheck arrived.

It was such a humbling experience and a lesson I hope I don’t have to repeat. But, I learned so much about who I am and what I’m truly capable of by challenging myself to become independent.

Establishing Independence
The relationship between a child and a parent is only one of the many relationships that may require one or both individuals to develop independence. Other examples include relationships between romantic partners and friendships.

Although every relationship has its own complexity, what I’ve learned is that there are three general steps on this path toward independence: declaration, separation and reconnection.

1. Declare It
The first step in the process is to declare your independence. Think of the declaration stage as severing the emotional umbilical cord. In this stage, you share your intent to become independent from the other person.

This declaration might be met with confusion, anger, sadness and a variety of other responses and emotions. Here are some things to remember when declaring your independence:

Communicate your message confidently and assertively.
Keep your message short and to the point.
Use “I” statements to communicate that your decision is not about them, it is about you.
Don’t feel the need to justify or apologize for your decision.
Release the need to take responsibility for the other person’s response.
The actual content of the message can be relatively simple. Consider this example.

“I’m making some positive changes in my life though they may not be easy for me to make. I’m trying to take more responsibility for myself and my life. I want to be more independent and to discover who I am. I’ve been dependent on you for (insert specific information) and I need to step away from my dependence on you and step more fully into myself. My decision is not a reflection of you. It’s a statement about me and where I am in my life. So, for a period of time, I’m going to have less involvement with you.”

It is likely that they may ask you for a specific time frame; simply state that you will take as long as necessary to develop your independence and discover who you are.

2. Separate Yourself
To separate means to form a distinct boundary between yourself and the other person. This can be done by separating physically, sexually, financially, or emotionally—what’s needed depends on the nature of the relationship.

If physical separation is not possible, limit the amount of time you spend talking to or interacting with this person.  Focus on defining healthy emotional boundaries and living according to them.

Ultimately, the purpose of separation is to allow you to see yourself more clearly and to discover what is necessary for your own wellbeing. In the space created by the separation, you allow your inner self to speak. The distractions once created by the needs, opinions, thoughts and feelings of the other person will begin to clear away. You are finally able to distinguish what is authentic, true and honest for yourself.

You become aware of the needs that were once fulfilled by your dependency on the other person and discover ways to meet those needs for yourself. Maybe you were dependent on the other person to motivate you, soothe you, distract you from your problems or make you feel loved.

What do you do when this other person no longer plays that role in your life?

You learn to take responsibility for motivating, soothing and loving yourself. You can also begin to address the issues you once avoided and ignored. Separation allows you to truly experience your independence and to regain power over your choices, behaviors, beliefs and the emotional footprints you create and leave behind.

Paradoxically, the more responsibility you take, the more freedom you will have—the freedom to be yourself and to live your life purposefully.

You’re probably asking, “How long should I separate?”

This depends on the circumstances and the nature of the relationship between you and the other person. However, it needs to be long enough for you to identify and understand your own needs, opinions, thoughts and motivations independently.

For some this may take days, weeks, years or even decades. Others may determine in the course of separation that reconnection is not a healthy decision no matter how much time has passed.

A simple test is this; tune into yourself.  What feelings emerge when you think about or interact with this person? If they are still predominantly negative or confusing, you may not be ready to reconnect.

If it is not possible to interact with the other person without losing yourself, evaluate whether this person deserves a place in your life at all.

3. Reconnect When You’re Ready
The final stage is reconnection. This stage involves making new agreements and re-negotiating the roles within the relationship. These roles should be clearly stated and agreed upon by both individuals.

Questions to consider:

What behaviors are acceptable? Unacceptable?
What expectations will you hold of one another?
What consequences will there be if these agreements aren’t honored?
Having consequences in place is not an attempt to control or manipulate the other person. Rather, it is a matter of being extremely clear about what works and what doesn’t work. Once you communicate these expectations, the other person then has the power to decide whether they agree or not.

This process requires you to be completely authentic and to act with integrity. If something isn’t working for you and you accept it anyway, you are being dishonest with yourself and the other person. This often causes confusion and repressed anger.

~

Clearly state your intentions.

Take time to discover your authentic self.

Re-negotiate the roles in the relationship.

The first year of life is a period when the baby is completely dependent on the mother. When the child starts walking and running, he likes to see the mother around him and to be with him, although he has the desire to move on his own and be independent. Until the age of 3, when socialization skills are acquired, children try to separate from their mothers while continuing their addiction. It is expected that this dependent relationship, which is seen up to the age of 3, will decrease after this age, and the relationship dimension will turn from addiction to commitment. We see that addiction, which is expected to decrease by the age of 3, continues for many years in our society, and even that many adults with children continue to be dependent on their own mothers. It can be said that the separation process does not occur in the expected time and the continuation of addiction is caused by the attitudes of the parents. It is known that mothers of children who develop addiction are overprotective and fathers are more distant or both parents have an overprotective attitude. From the age of 2, children want to do some work on their own and they insist on this. It is necessary to give the child the opportunity to do some work on his own in accordance with his age and to support the child. Children aged 3-4 can do things on their own or with little support, such as eating, dressing, collecting toys, washing hands, and properly meeting their toilet needs. Not allowing a child with these skills to do his job on his own and doing everything instead increases the child’s dependence on the mother and negatively affects his self-confidence. The addicted child does not leave his mother’s skirt, cannot even bear the mother’s going to the toilet, cannot be alone even for a short time, acts insecure and timid, has difficulty in establishing relationships with his peers, becomes a child who constantly cries and whines.

Addiction, which is considered normal until the age of 3, is expected to decrease from this age. In cases of addiction that continues after this age, parents first of all need to accept that their child is no longer a baby in need of care, but a growing individual. It is necessary to support and guide him in the works he can do on his own, to give him confidence that he can do it, and to give him the opportunity to express his wishes.


Children can be separated from their mothers for short periods from infancy. At the age of 3-4, they can stay away from the mother all day long, and even for a few weeks in compulsory situations, they can endure being separated from the mother. Addictive children, on the other hand, have difficulty in staying in a separate room from their mother and playing games on their own, even at home. Contrary to popular belief, the fear of separation is not only seen in children of working mothers. When told in appropriate language, children understand and accept that their mother has to go to work and will return home in the evening. Every child is uneasy about leaving his mother’s side, and worries about whether he will return or not. This anxiety is experienced more intensely in children with continuing addiction characteristics compared to other children. Ensuring that the child stays with people he knows and trusts for a short time, giving accurate information about where to go and when to return, showing this on the clock if necessary, and telling you that he can call you if the conditions are suitable are methods that will facilitate the child’s learning to stay away from the mother.


Children who have difficulty separating from their mothers have difficulties in going to kindergarten and adapting. Kindergarten is not only an environment where the child is looked after or plays, but also a social environment where his socialization skills develop, he learns to obey the rules, to establish relations with his peers and to share. Especially the children who continue to be addicted to go to kindergarten reduce this addiction. However, here again, parental attitudes play an important role. First of all, parents should accept that kindergarten plays an important role in the social learning environment and social development of the child. It is very difficult for a child who has never been separated from his mother to suddenly enter an unfamiliar environment and stay there. When the thought of starting a kindergarten occurs, you can start by ensuring that the child stays with people he/she has known for short periods, at least a few months ago. In cases where this is not possible, again a few months in advance, explaining the kindergarten environment to the child, the activities to be done there, showing what it is like by passing in front of the kindergartens, visiting different kindergartens and playing for short periods are activities that will enable the child to get to know the kindergarten. It is important to tell when you will take him to the nest, when and who will take it, by specifying the activity, and to tell what he will do in the nest during the day when he starts the nest. It is very important to tell the truth about the pick-up time and to comply with it as much as possible for the development of the child’s sense of trust. Many children who are afraid of separation try various ways not to go to kindergarten. Crying, abdominal pain, vomiting are the most common symptoms in these ages. Not sending the child to the kindergarten in the face of these reactions will make it difficult to get used to the kindergarten and will reinforce the addiction. At this point, it is necessary to be determined and calm, not to react because she cries or vomits, to ensure that she goes to the nest unless there is a physical problem, and not to prolong the separation ceremonies at the door of the nest. It should not be forgotten that in cases where separation anxiety is not resolved in the pre-school period, similar situations will be seen in the school period.

If parents want to raise dependent children, they should:

Do everything for the child.

Understand and fulfill their requests without expressing them.

Don’t accept that he’s grown up and act like he’s still a baby.

Do not allow opportunities to develop their skills.

Avoid activities (such as eating) that he insists on doing on his own by saying, “You can’t, you can’t.”

Carry it in a stroller or on your lap even though it can walk.

Always use phrases like “Oh, stop, you will fall”.

Don’t leave it with you, don’t let it stay with people you know.

When you do these, be sure that your child will be dependent on you for life, you

Can’t do anything without it.

Drug dependence is defined as a psychic and physical state of the person characterized by behavioral and other responses resulting in compulsions to take a drug, on a continuous or periodic basis in order to experience its psychic effect and at times to avoid the discomfort of its absence.

From: Illustrated Toxicology, 2018

Related terms:
CocaineOpiateDopaminePrevalenceAlcoholismDrug Use
View all Topics
Intracranial Neuromodulation
Joseph Jankovic MD, in Bradley and Daroff's Neurology in Clinical Practice, 2022

Drug Addiction
Addiction is the behavior characterized by relentlessly seeking drugs despite knowledge of possible adverse consequences (Kreek, 2008).Imaging studies in humans have revealed that addiction seems to involve sudden surges in extracellular dopamine in limbic areas including the NAc (shell and core) and the dorsal striatum. Prolonged drug abuse may result in reorganization of the reward and memory circuits and lead to increased sensitivity to various signals, which may trigger relapse (Koob and Volkow, 2010). As an alternative to medical therapy, stereotactic neurosurgery-leucotomy (Knight, 1969), hypothalamotomy (Dieckmann and Schneider, 1978), cingulotomy (Kanaka and Balasubramaniam, 1978), and ablation of the NAc (Gao et al., 2003) have been attempted and shown variable effectiveness. The irreversibility of lesions, the behavioral implications, and the trial designs of ablative procedures have led to uncertainty about their place in clinical practice (Stelten et al., 2008).

STN DBS in PD has been reported in some cases to help with dopamine dysregulation syndrome (Witjas et al., 2005), while there are reports of smoking cessation (Kuhn et al., 2009; Mantione et al., 2010) and treatment of alcohol dependency (Heldmann et al., 2012;Kuhn et al.. 2007, 2011, Müller et al., 2009, 2016; Voges et al., 2013) following DBS in the NAc. Improvement in drug-seeking behaviors following DBS of the NAc have also been reported in cases and an open-label pilot study for the treatment of heroin dependence (Chen et al., 2019;Kuhn et al., 2014; Valencia-Alfonso et al., 2012; Zhou, Xu, and Jiang, 2011), and cocaine dependence have recently been reported (Gonçalves-Ferreira et al., 2016).

Drug Dependence
Douglas H. Ruben, in Encyclopedia of Applied Psychology, 2004

1.1 Dependence versus Abuse
Drug dependence differs from drug abuse in three ways. First, drug dependence consists of clearly measurable periods of tolerance and withdrawal, whereas drug abuse sets the occasion for tolerance and withdrawal. Abuse means there exist early warning signs of life impairment predictive of physical and psychological dependence. Adults arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol, for instance, often face fears that their uncontrolled drinking may result in fatal vehicular accidents. Second, drug-dependent users show marked cognitive, behavioral, and psychomotor retardation in their daily activities. Drug abusers, however, may or may not suffer apparent cognitive, behavioral, or psychomotor malfunctioning; they may mask intoxication symptoms by performing their jobs and vehicular operations adequately and interacting normally with their families. Third, the phenomenon of withdrawal syndrome applies only to drug dependence. Drug abusers are episodic and not routine users, and their consumptive rates are variable; intermittent and lesser quantity users build resistance to adverse cognitive and visceral repercussions and only suffer mild or no side effects after abrupt cessation of desired substances.

Codeine
J.K. Aronson MA, DPhil, MBChB, FRCP, HonFBPhS, HonFFPM, in Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs, 2016

Drug dependence
In an exploratory survey among long-term codeine users recruited via newspaper advertisements in Toronto, Canada, more than 300 individuals who used codeine on at least 3 days per week for a minimum of 6 months and were older than 16 years were studied [16]. Those who used codeine for pain related to malignancy were excluded. The mean age of the respondents included in the final analysis (n = 339) was 44 years and 51% were women. On average, the total number of years of regular codeine use was 12, with a current mean daily dose of 115 mg. About 60% (n = 213) had sought help for mental health problems, most commonly for depression (70%), followed by generalized anxiety (55%) and panic attacks (24%). One-third of the subjects (n = 339) identified at least one family member as having a mental health problem, with depression as the most frequent. Current antidepressant use was reported by 14% of the whole sample. Men used significantly higher doses of codeine than women; they also used the drug for a longer period and more commonly took it for pleasurable effects and under social pressure. Regular codeine users, in addition to having high rates of drug dependence, had raised scores on general measures of psychological distress and depressive symptoms. From the survey it was not clear to what extent these symptoms preceded codeine use and may have initiated the use and to what extent they were caused by codeine. The authors speculated that many respondents used codeine to modulate mood, particularly dysphoria, in the absence of more appropriate interventions. They suggested that understanding long-term codeine use and its relation to dysphoria may be important in designing both preventive and secondary treatment interventions.

The same investigators further analysed the data according to codeine abuse/dependent and non-dependent status [17]. There was codeine abuse/dependence in 41% of the subjects. The most common psychological and physical problems attributed to codeine use in the dependent/abuse group (n = 124) were depression (23%), anxiety (22%), gastrointestinal disturbances (15%), constipation (6%), and headache/migraine (5%). The codeine-dependent subjects were younger than those who were not dependent. The mean age of the respondents when they first started using codeine was 26 (range 2–78) years. A total of 563 codeine products had been used on a regular basis; the most common combination involved codeine with paracetamol (70%). Codeine was used for headaches (41%), back pain (22%), and other types of pain (25%). Those in the dependent group were more likely to have used codeine initially for other reasons, for example for pleasure and to relax or reduce stress. Most subjects said that they had obtained their codeine from one physician (66%) or by purchasing it over the counter (54%). Subjects in the dependent group also obtained codeine from friends (32%), from family (11%), “off the street” (19%), and through prescriptions from more than one physician (11%). Overall, more subjects in the dependent group considered themselves to have problems with a larger number of substances (3.3: range 0–15) compared with those in the non-dependent group (1.2: range 0–8). In the dependent group, more subjects said that their physical or mental health problems interfered with normal social activities at least “quite a bit.” Significantly more subjects in the dependent group had sought help for a mental health problem, had had an inpatient psychiatric admission, or had sought help for a substance-use disorder, especially alcohol and stimulants. A larger number of subjects in the dependent group identified at least one family member (usually male) with substance-use problems compared with those in the non-dependent group.

Drug Addiction
A.N. Mead, in Encyclopedia of Behavioral Neuroscience, 2010

Drug Addiction
While specific definitions of drug addiction (or substance dependence) vary, there is general agreement regarding the factors that are typical of the addicted or dependent individual. Definitions typically require the act of compulsive or obsessive drug seeking, a progressive increase in the amount of drug taken over time, and the occurrence of a negative affective state following withdrawal of the drug. These three components can also be viewed as describing aspects of craving, loss of control over drug intake, and physical dependence, respectively. While it is not possible to study or model drug addiction in any single animal model, by breaking down the complex disorder of drug addiction into its more basic components, it becomes possible to model specific aspects of addictive behavior. For example, one can develop animal models to study aspects of drug taking or drug seeking, while separately investigating the development of physical dependence and the occurrence of negative affect during withdrawal from chronic drug administration. As with all complex disorders of the brain, the value of animal models of drug addiction really lies in understanding the psychological and neurobiological mechanisms, which underlie specific aspects of the disorder, and the subsequent application of such learning to the clinical situation.

Buprenorphine
J.K. Aronson MA, DPhil, MBChB, FRCP, HonFBPhS, HonFFPM, in Meyler's Side Effects of Drugs, 2016

Drug dependence
Sublingual buprenorphine is an alternative to methadone in treating opiate dependence, but its opioid agonist effects pose the risk of intravenous abuse and subsequent dependence. This abuse potential may be limited by using a combination of buprenorphine with naloxone, which will precipitate opiate withdrawal when given intravenously but not sublingually. The effects of three combinations of intravenous buprenorphine and naloxone on agonist effects and withdrawal signs and symptoms in 12 opiate-dependent patients have been described [50]. After stabilization with morphine 60 mg intramuscularly the patients were challenged with intravenous doses of buprenorphine 2 mg, either alone or in combination with naloxone in ratios of 2:1, 4:1, and 8:1, with morphine alone (15 mg), or with placebo. In those given the combination there was a naloxone dose-dependent increase in opiate withdrawal signs and a reduction in the pleasurable effects that might induce abuse liability. The authors suggested that the combination of buprenorphine with naloxone in a ratio of 2:1 or 4:1 can be useful in the treatment of opiate dependence.

The authors of a randomized, multicenter, placebo-controlled, double-blind study of 72 opioid-dependent individuals, who were given either buprenorphine 8 mg/day or methadone 60 mg/day for 6 months, claimed that there were no significant differences in adverse effects during induction or maintenance [51]. Buprenorphine provided an alternative to methadone, with equal improvement in quality of life, psychopathology, and compliance. The results of this study should be interpreted with care, because of the unusual experimental design, which did not reflect practices in ordinary methadone maintenance programs. However, similar observations were observed during an open, flexible-dose study involving inpatient induction and outpatient maintenance in 15 opioid-dependent pregnant women [52]. Sublingual buprenorphine (1–10 mg/day) was well accepted by the women, and there was a low incidence of neonatal abstinence syndrome. Further controlled and larger studies need to be done to substantiate these observations.

In a double-blind, randomized comparison of sublingual buprenorphine tablets with oral methadone in a 6-week trial in 58 patients using a flexible dosing procedure the retention rate was significantly better in those using methadone (90% versus 50%) [53]. Those who completed the study had a similar number of opioid-positive urine samples, with a mean stabilization dose of 11 mg/day of buprenorphine and 70 mg/day of methadone. This study had several limitations: 6 weeks is too short a period to determine any intermediate or long-term treatment outcomes, the sample size was too small, and the comparison of non-equivalent doses makes interpretation difficult.

Drug dependence
Stephen Haydock, in Clinical Pharmacology (Eleventh Edition), 2012

General patterns of use
Patterns of drug dependence differ with age. Men are more commonly involved than women. Patterns change as drugs come in and out of vogue. The general picture in the UK is shown in Table 11.2. Data on illicit drug use in the UK are provided from a number of sources but up-to-date information on prevalence and patterns of usage can be obtained from the annual British Crime Survey. Data from the 2008/2009 survey indicate that one in three people between the ages of 16 and 59 had ever used illicit drugs while 1 in 10 had used an illicit substance in the previous year. The survey also allows observations on the trends in illicit drug use over time, as shown in Table 11.3.

Substance Use Disorders
James J. Nocon, in Clinical Pharmacology During Pregnancy, 2013

15.7 Psychiatric co-morbidity
A critical aspect of the effective treatment of substance use disorders is to identify and treat psychiatric co-morbid disorders. Some co-morbid psychiatric problems are more common in women [46]:

▪
Bipolar disorders

▪
Panic disorder

▪
PTSD

▪
Cluster B personality disorders

▪
Bulimia

▪
Depression

In addition, genetic markers have been identified with a number of psychiatric disorders in which there is a higher incidence of substance use [47]. They include:

▪
Low P3 amplitude (schizophrenia, ADHD)

▪
Conduct disorder (CD)

▪
Antisocial personality (ASPD)

▪
Decrease in dopamine receptor density (D2)

▪
Serotonin (5-HT) systems

Pharmacologic treatment of these disorders enhances recovery from substance use and also poses additional problems for the fetus including need for treatment of the neonate in special intensive care units for symptoms of withdrawal [48]. This is especially true for benzodiazepines, which have a higher rate of teratogenicity and withdrawal, especially when combined with alcohol [49]. Risks and benefits of pharmacologic treatment are most important when treating co-morbidity in pregnancy.

Drug Addiction
A.I. Leshner, in International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences, 2001

Drug abuse and addiction are among the largest and most challenging problems facing society today. Scientific advances over the past twenty years have shown that drug addiction is a chronic, relapsing disease that results from the prolonged effects of drugs on the brain. These fundamental brain changes may persist even after the individual has stopped taking drugs and can potentially impact an individual's learning and memory capacity. Studies demonstrate that addiction is eminently treatable and has success rates comparable with results found with other chronic disorders. There is quite an array of pharmacological and behavioral treatments available that can help an individual to stop using drugs and maintain a drug-free life style. The ultimate goal of treatment is to return the individual back to being a functioning member of society.

Substance Use Disorders and Comorbid Mental Illness
Shaul Lev-Ran, ... Jonah Fox, in Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse, 2016

Abstract
Substance use disorders (SUDs) and mental illness frequently co-occur. Cross-sectional studies indicate that mood and anxiety disorders occur at higher rates among individuals with SUDs and that increased prevalence of SUDs are found among those with mood and anxiety disorders. Specific rates of comorbidity differ depending on the specific SUD and mental illness in question. Longitudinal studies have reported mixed results regarding the temporal association between SUDs and mood and anxiety disorders. Among all mood and anxiety disorders, bipolar disorder seems to be particularly associated with the future development of SUDs. This chapter focuses on the epidemiological data regarding the comorbidity of SUDs and mood and anxiety disorders, presenting a summary of cross-sectional and longitudinal research on the topic. The authors conclude by presenting a review of etiopathogenic hypotheses concerning these comorbidities.

ADH Cluster Genes, Genome-Wide Association Studies, and Alcohol Dependence
Byung Lae Park, Hyoung Doo Shin, in Neuropathology of Drug Addictions and Substance Misuse, 2016

Applications to Other Addictions and Substance Misuse
Drug dependence, including cocaine and opioid dependence, is one of the most common phenotypes comorbid with AD. Drug dependence has been shown to have a number of characteristics in common with AD, such as response to specific treatments. In fact, drug dependence may share susceptibility genes with AD. Several studies have demonstrated that polymorphisms of OPRM1 may moderate the risk of AD and/or drug dependence (Hoehe et al., 2000; Luo, Kranzler, Zhao, & Gelernter, 2003; Schinka et al., 2002). Luo et al. (2006, 2005) showed that ADH4 may play an important role in AD as well as drug dependence based on association studies of the relationship between the ADH gene cluster and drug dependence. Both the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium and a case–control comparison revealed that the association of ADH4 gene with drug dependence reached levels of statistical significance that were at least as great as those for AD. Overall, the ADH gene cluster may predominantly contribute to the risk of AD, and ADH4 on the ADH gene cluster may similarly contribute to drug dependence, such as cocaine and opioid.

While most people refer to "drug addiction" as the common substance use problem, "drug dependence" is actually a more accurate term. Drug dependence is the term used in medicine and is specifically defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM). Drug abuse, along with drug dependence, make up the category of substance use disorders.

Drug dependency encompasses physiological and psychological symptoms related to the obsessive craving and using of a drug.

Drug Dependence - What is Drug Dependency?
Drug dependence applies to any drug, including alcohol, that is consumed repeatedly in spite of the negative consequences the drug use is having on the life of the drug user and the lives of those around the user. Drug dependence indicates the drug user is dependent on the drug either physically, psychologically or both in order to function in everyday life. (read: physical and psychological effects of drug addiction)

Drug Dependence - Drug Dependency and the Brain
Drug dependence is defined in the DSM as a recognized medical illness in part because of the way drug dependency affects the brain.

While each substance is different, drugs tend to release the chemicals dopamine and serotonin in the brain. These chemicals flood parts of the brain, specifically the reward center, being perceived as extremely pleasurable. Repeatedly releasing large amounts of these chemicals results in the brain adapting to the increase in dopamine and serotonin by decreasing the number of chemical receptors. This change in chemical receptors decreases the drug user's ability to enjoy things that previously brought them pleasure. The user must take more of the drug to feel good again, creating drug dependence.1

Drug dependence is also thought to involve other parts of the brain. Stress mechanisms, neuron creation and communication, learning and memory are all thought to be part of drug dependency.

Drug Dependence - Symptoms of Drug Dependency
A drug user may be, or feel, dependent on a drug in many ways. This drug dependency is seen in the way the user compulsively and repetitively uses their substance of choice. Symptoms of drug dependency include:

Drug tolerance - increasing amount of the drug are needed to achieve the same high
Withdrawal symptoms when not using the drug
Severe cravings for the drug
Taking dangerous amounts of the drug
Fixation on finding ways to afford the drug, drug buying and places to use the drug
Needing the drug to function, for example, needing it "to get going" in the morning

People often try drugs to experience the high and to run away from their problems, thinking they have the power to stop it at any point in their lives. After consuming them for an extended period, they realize the hard truth that it’s too late to overcome this dangerous habit. 


Dependence on drugs is not new to the world, and even though people know how bad their effects are on the body, they figure that you only live once, right? We disagree with that, and in this article, you’ll be able to learn more about why it’s imperative to quit drugs, what it feels like to stop taking them, and how to overcome them effectively. 

Why quit drugs?
No matter how hard it feels, it’s never too late to quit drugs. Decreasing their intake will improve your life significantly. By avoiding drugs, you will:


Improve your mental and physical health
Reduce your expenses
Feel energetic
Increase the life of your vital organs 
Increase your lifespan
Improve your social relationships
Sleep better
Look healthier
now your inner self better
Drug addicts who have recovered explain that quitting made their lives better, but it can take time to reach that stage. The withdrawal stage in between quitting drugs and getting better is the most challenging to deal with. And, the ones who overcome it win the jackpot of life.


What it feels like to quit drugs
Drug intake is not even voluntary at times. Many patients have to undergo complicated treatments. For instance, opioids like fentanyl or morphine are given to cancer patients to numb the severe pain. It reduces the pain to some extent, but once the treatment is over, it often leaves patients with a severe addiction that is hard to overcome. 


When you start to come off a substance, your body starts to experience withdrawal symptoms. While going through this stage, the body experiences side effects that can be mild or serious, depending on the addiction level. In most cases, people often have to get help for fentanyl addiction because overcoming the withdrawal symptoms is not easy. And Fentanyl is just one of many drugs that act as double-edged swords. 


Tips to quit drugs
Quitting drugs is not easy; you may be addicted or dependent and don’t even realise it. 

Admit you are facing an issue. Your first step is, to be honest with yourself and admit that you have a problem. Ask yourself various questions that help you realise the ugly truth. If you keep ignoring it, you will only ruin your life as time goes by.
Surround yourself with sober people. While you are trying to overcome your drug addiction, you should try socialising with supportive people. Find groups consisting of sober people who will encourage you to stay away from drugs. You might have gotten an addiction due to the fact that you were surrounded by friends who were drug addicts themselves. Friendship aside, such a group could be toxic for you, so you should avoid them unless they care to overcome their addiction as well.
Keep yourself busy. Sometimes the best way to overcome an addiction is to divert your mind to something else. Maybe you have a hobby or interest you want to try. Starting a hobby might help you regain your motivation, confidence, and purpose in life. Plus, you will stay away from your unhealthy habits of the past.
Work out. Exercising regularly will help improve your physical and mental well-being. Working out releases endorphins, which are naturally good for the body, making you healthier and will help in reducing your withdrawal symptoms eventually. You don’t necessarily have to start with a high-intensity workout. Just a brisk walk every day can do the trick. Keep adding more exercise routines as you grow accustomed to your rehabilitation period.
Focus on your diet. While exercise is essential, you cannot ignore the fact that you also need to eat well. After all, a healthy diet will help you stay energetic, motivated, and committed to overcoming your addiction. Moreover, good food will help improve your mood while fighting the problem you are facing.
Meditate. They say that meditation is the best medication, and we couldn’t agree more. The best thing about meditation is that it is flexible. You don’t necessarily have to stick with a specific pattern to practice it. You can create your method of meditation. Find ways of meditating to ensure you stay happy and content. 
Final thoughts
As you can see, there are several ways by which you can overcome your drug addiction. Practising a few of them every day in your life can reap lasting benefits. Also, it helps you stay sharp and focused on working on your life goals. Never feel ashamed of getting help from your friends, family members, or professionals, as you only live once – so why not make the best out of the precious opportunity.

Abstract
A number of definitions of drug dependence exist. The current idea is summarized as follows: drug dependence is a chronic, progressive disease characterized by significant impairment that is directly associated with persistent and excessive use of a psychoactive substance. Impairment may involve physiological, psychological, or social dysfunction. The most helpful one to physicians is based on the descriptions of WHO's ICD and APA's DSM. The criteria for drug dependence of ICD-10 and DSM-IV are given in this paper. To facilitate the harmonization process of the forthcoming development of DSM V and ICD-11, differences in the both definitions are also discussed.

The continual use of a drug in order to avoid its uncomfortable withdrawal symptoms creates physical dependence. But is this what keeps drug addicts using drugs? We explore the difference between physical and psychological dependence here…then, we invite your questions about dependence at the end.

What is Physical Dependence on Drugs?
Psychoactive substances are chemicals that act primarily on the central nervous system and can include alcohol, LSD, caffeine, and heroin. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) define physical dependence as a “condition in which a person takes a drug over time, and unpleasant physical symptoms occur if the drug is suddenly stopped or taken in smaller doses”.

Dependence is sometimes considered the same as ‘addiction’, as dependence arouses the ‘need’ for a substance that causes “enjoyable mental effects” and can have adverse impact on the social, personal and economical welfare of the user.  But to what extent is dependence physical? And how much of dependence is actually psychological?

What is Psychological Dependence on Drugs?
The Health Department of Australia states that psychological dependence occurs when a drug becomes “central to the person’s thoughts, activities and emotions”.

In other words, a psychologically dependent user demonstrates a strong desire to use the drug for a psychological aspect (need for stimulation or pleasure). For example, if someone tries to stop doing cocaine but is unable to do so and he misses the ‘high’ he got from crack, then he is psychologically dependent on the drug.

Is Psychological Dependence Physical?
Sometimes.

Before we go further, it will help to explore some of the principle and agreed upon definitions used in the diagnosis of substance use disorders.

Once the body starts adapting to a drug, it requires more and more of the psychoactive chemical to achieve a certain high (tolerance).
Further, when a user experiences painful physical withdrawal symptoms upon abrupt cessation or drastic dose reduction of a drug, s/he is considered drug-dependent (dependence).
Early addiction theories asserted physical withdrawal symptoms as the cause of addiction. According to the ‘tolerance-withdrawal addiction theory’, a drug user continues the use of a substance to avoid the withdrawal symptoms. However, this theory failed as some drugs have nominal physical withdrawal symptoms but are very addictive (cocaine and nicotine). Moreover, if some users get over the withdrawal symptoms, their drug consumption may not cease.

Many researchers, however, argue that psychological dependence is also ‘physical’ as the psychological need for a drug arises due its physical effects on our brain. As Adi Jaffe writes, “Psychological addiction and physical addiction are the same…since brain is technically part of our body”. So it can be said that physical dependence simply accompanies the addiction.

So let’s take a look at the effects of the three most addictive drugs on our brain (heroine, cocaine and nicotine) to provide a testimony to the above claim.

Heroin, Cocaine, Nicotine and Other Psychoactive Drugs
Q: What’s common among heroin, cocaine and nicotine?
A: All these psychoactive chemicals, directly or indirectly, affect the brain’s nervous system by “flooding the circuit with dopamine”.

Dopamine is a neurotransmitter present in regions of the brain that control movement, emotion, motivation, and feelings of pleasure. Psychoactive drugs create an over-stimulation of dopamine nearly five to ten times the normal level. This results in a euphoric feeling.

When the drug starts to wear off, the dopamine level declines. This is because the process of artificially flooding the brain with dopamine can lead to desensitization of the dopamine receptors. This can happen after consuming the drug just once. With the reduction in the dopamine level comes a reduction in pleasure and the result is depression. This is why the latter is common among drug users.

So, the user starts craving the drugs in its absence, he starts feeling a slight emptiness-that something is missing. If it is prolonged, the user becomes anxious, restless and agitated. However, when the drug is consumed again, his craving ends, resulting in a feeling of relaxation and security.

This is the base experience of psychological dependence on a drug: the user is craving it to feel relaxed. He never experiences the initial high again but continually seeks it.

Psychological dependence originates from the physical
As the body develops a tolerance to the drug, the user starts increasing his consumption. Soon, this becomes an addiction- the user needs the drug all the time. It takes over his mind and habits. All he is concerned about is getting the next dose of the psychoactive.

While withdrawal symptoms make it harder to get over drug addiction, it can be argued that they are nothing but psychologically created ailments in the absence of drugs (like anxiety, sleeplessness, mood swings, depression and so forth). However, what characterizes addiction is that a user wants to continue using a drug to get a psychological relief from the stress the psychoactive chemical created in the first place.

Dependence originates in craving
So, we can conclude that psychological dependence starts from a physical change in the body chemistry. A person uses a psychoactive drug and LIKES the effect. This sensitivity to euphoria ensures the drug user begins to crave the substance. In fact, craving is common in people with lots of stress and problems, as drugs help them achieve a sense of pleasure that is absent in their life.

But what begins as a coping mechanism can quickly devolve into a problem. When psychological dependence on a drug triggers continued use, physical dependence can follow, making it very difficult to break a brain-based reward system. Both need to be addressed (if present) and the underlying psychological compulsion, the mental dependence on a drug, requires work, if a person is to remain drug-free for an extended period of time.

Dependence on prescription medicines linked to deprivation
PHE has published the first-ever evidence review of dependence and withdrawal problems associated with 5 commonly prescribed classes of medicines in England.

From:
Public Health England
Published
10 September 2019
Bottles of prescription medication
The Prescribed medicines review assesses the scale and distribution of prescribed medicines – and makes recommendations for better monitoring, treatment and support for patients.

It uses available prescriptions data, a literature review and reports of patients’ experiences.

A total of 5 classes of medicines were included in the review:

benzodiazepines (mainly prescribed for anxiety and insomnia)
Z-drugs (insomnia)
gabapentinoids (neuropathic pain)
opioid pain medications (for chronic non-cancer pain such as low back pain and injury-related and degenerative joint disease)
antidepressants (depression)
The main findings include:

1 in 4 adults had been prescribed at least one of these classes of medicines in the year ending March 2018
in March 2018 half of those receiving a prescription (of these classes of medicine) had been continuously prescribed for at least the previous 12 months. Between 22% and 32% (depending on the medicine class) had received a prescription for at least the previous 3 years
long-term prescribing of opioid pain medicines and benzodiazepines is falling but still occurs frequently – which is not in line with the guidelines or evidence on effectiveness
Trends in prescribing include:

the number of prescriptions for antidepressants and gabapentinoids are rising
following years of increase prior to 2016, prescriptions for opioid pain medicines and z-drugs are now falling
prescriptions for benzodiazepines continue to fall, as they were prior to 2016
women and older adults (particularly over-75s) are prescribed to at the highest rates
Links to deprivation include:

prescribing rates and duration of prescription are higher in some of the most deprived areas of England
a similar pattern is also seen for the number of medicines co-prescribed (for example, at least 2 of the drugs)
for opioids and gabapentinoids, the prescribing rate in the most deprived quintile was 1.6 times the rate in the least deprived quintile
the co-prescribing rate in the most deprived quintile was 1.4 times higher than in the least deprived quintile (30% compared to 21%)
Opioids for chronic non-cancer pain are known to be ineffective for most people when used long-term (over 3 months), while benzodiazepines are not recommended to be used for longer than 28 days. The review identified that when first used these medicines are prescribed for short term use. However, some patients do still end up being prescribed these medicines for longer periods.

Long-term prescribing is likely to result in dependence or withdrawal problems, but it is not possible to put an exact figure on the prevalence of dependence and withdrawal from current data.

People who have been on these drugs for longer time periods should not stop taking their medication suddenly. If they are concerned, they should seek the support of their GP.

People who had experienced problems from prescription medicines also reported that they felt uninformed before they started them, and unsupported when they experienced problems.

The drugs in this review are vitally important (when prescribed properly) for the health and wellbeing of many patients. It is important that doctors follow the clinical guidelines and do not put inappropriate limits on prescribing that could cause patients’ harm or drive them to seek drugs from illicit sources.

The review makes a number of recommendations focusing on education and treatment, including:

giving NHS commissioners and doctors better access to data, improving insight of prescribing behaviour in their local area and enabling GPs to follow best practice
updating clinical guidance for medicines which can cause problems with dependence and withdrawal, and improving training for clinicians to ensure their prescribing adheres to best practice
to develop new clinical guidance on the safe management of dependence and withdrawal problems
giving better information to patients about the benefits and risks with these medicines
doctors should have clear discussions with patients - and where appropriate offer alternatives, such as social prescribing
commissioners ensure appropriate support is available locally for patients experiencing problems
a national helpline for patients to be set up
ensuring high-quality research around dependence and withdrawal is undertaken
PHE has also published a detailed geographical breakdown by clinical commissioning groups of prescribing rates for 2017 to 2018 and the proportion of people that had been receiving a prescription for at least 12 months prior to March 2018.

Rosanna O’Connor, Director of Alcohol, Drugs, Tobacco and Justice at PHE said:

We know that GPs in some of the more deprived areas are under great pressure but, as this review highlights, more needs to be done to educate and support patients, as well as looking closely at prescribing practice, and what alternative treatments are available locally.

While the scale and nature of opioid prescribing does not reflect the so-called crisis in North America, the NHS needs to take action now to protect patients.

Our recommendations have been developed with expert medical royal colleges, the NHS and patients that have experienced long-term problems. The practical package of measures will make a difference to help prevent problems arising and support those that are struggling on these medications.

Professor Paul Cosford, Emeritus Medical Director at PHE said:

These medicines have many vital clinical uses and can make a big difference to people’s quality of life and for some their long-term use is clinically necessary, particularly antidepressants, which can take longer to have their full effect.

This report shows that while the vast majority of new prescriptions for these medicines are for short term use, within clinical guidelines, it also highlights significant numbers have been taking these medicines for a long time. It is vital that clinical guidelines for prescribing are followed and regular reviews with patients take place to address this.

We also know how difficult it is for some people to come off these medicines and more research is needed for us to understand better how we help people to stop using them when they are no longer clinically helpful.

Keith Ridge, Chief Pharmaceutical Officer at NHS England, said:

As PHE rightly say, these medicines have many vital clinical uses and can make a big difference to people’s quality of life and for some their long-term use is clinically necessary, particularly antidepressants, which can take longer to have their full effect.

But for many patients they may not be the best option - with talking therapies and social prescribing often more appropriate.

Arabella Tresilian, a patient who has experienced problems associated with withdrawal, said:

I was on and off anti-depressants for over twenty years, juggling work and family life at the same time. I really struggled to come off them and in 2015 I was diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder and chronic fatigue. Day to day activities became overwhelming and I quickly began to feel isolated.

I was very lucky that my doctor’s surgery offered social prescribing which made all the difference. They referred me to a local choir which helped me with my recovery and gave me back my confidence.

I know first-hand that dependence and withdrawal from prescription medicines can be extremely difficult to cope with. It is reassuring that this review recognises that more needs to be done and I am hopeful that social prescribing will now be offered more widely.

Background
The review analysed available NHS prescriptions data from community pharmacies from April 2015 to March 2018 on 5 classes of prescribed medicines:

antidepressants
opioids
gabapentinoids (gabapentin and pregabalin)
benzodiazepines
z-drugs
It also included a rapid evidence assessment of literature on the harms caused by dependence or withdrawal, risk factors, treatment and prevention interventions and the support patients receive.

An expert reference group, made up of a broad range of specialists and experts by experience, was recruited to provide advice and support for the project.

The Prescribed Medicines Review (PMR) brought together the best available evidence, following PRISMA guidelines, on:

prevalence and prescribing patterns in adults
the nature and risk factors of dependence and withdrawal symptoms associated with prescribed medicines among some adults who take these medicines
effective prevention and treatment of dependence and withdrawal for each drug category Supportive statements
Dr Norma O’Flynn, Chief Operating Officer of the National Guideline Centre at the Royal College of Physicians said:

We’re pleased to be able to support the work of PHE on their prescriptions medicines review by conducting systematic reviews of the research evidence.

The reviews and report recommendations are important steps in promoting a focus on managing prescription and withdrawal and highlighting areas where more research is required to inform practice.

Professor John Read from University of East London, speaking on behalf of the British Psychological Society’s representative on the PHE review’s Expert Reference Group said:

We thank Public Health England for all its work on this hugely important report.

We especially welcome the thorough research review documenting the alarming numbers of people experiencing withdrawal effects from prescribed medicines, and the recommendations for urgently needed services and a phone line to support people struggling to come off these drugs, including antidepressants.

We also value the emphasis placed on increasing accessibility to talking therapies for the problems that the drugs are currently prescribed for.

Heavy dependence on drugs can impact mental health: Study
A new study found that people with a history of drug dependence are much less likely to have flourishing mental health and are more likely to have mental illnesses.
drugs and mental healthYour mental health can take a hit due to drug usage. Image courtesy: Shutterstock
ANI
PUBLISHED ON:
15 JULY 2021, 10:23 AM IST
195  
LISTEN TO THIS ARTICLE
A new study found that people with a history of drug dependence are much less likely to have flourishing mental health and are more likely to have mental illnesses.


The findings of the study were published in the ‘International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction’.

Here’s what the study has to say
Researchers compared a nationally representative sample of 460 Canadians with a history of illicit drug dependence (excluding cannabis) to 20,305 Canadians with no history of illicit drug dependence using data drawn from Statistic Canada’s Canadian Community Health Survey-Mental Health.

While 80 per cent of those with a history of drug dependence were in remission, more than half (52.1 per cent) were still experiencing mental illness. Further, only 37.9 per cent were in excellent mental health, which is markedly lower than the 74.1 per cent of Canadians without a history of drug dependence who had excellent mental health.

drugs and mental health
Smoking cannabis is not good for your heart. Image courtesy: Shutterstock
To be considered in excellent mental health, participants had to report: 1) freedom from mental illness in the previous year (i.e., substance dependence, psychiatric disorders, suicidality); 2) almost daily happiness or life satisfaction in the past month; and 3) high levels of social and psychological well-being in the past month.

Dependence Process of a Child | Essay | Child | Social Psychology
Article Shared by 
ADVERTISEMENTS:


After reading this essay you will learn about the aspects of dependence process of a child.

The new-born infant has to depend on the mother for food, protec­tion from dangers and wide variations in temperature, etc., for its survival. Thus, from the moment of birth the child is enmeshed in social relationships. This is how the socialization demands of the adults can be successfully applied on the child. It is the infant’s dependence on the mother that provides the essential condition for socialization.

The mother ‘conditions’ the child to expect food at certain regular intervals and to adopt the customary pattern of sleeping at night. Through reinforcement the mother makes certain responses of the child rewarding and certain other responses not rewarding; this ensures that certain responses are forthcoming.

ADVERTISEMENTS:


This is how the helpless infant is transformed into a member of the home. But it must be remembered that much of what the child learns in the process of growing up is not systematically and deliberately taught. The parents do not take the role of the teachers. This is the phenomenon of incidental learning.

According to Sears (1957), it is through dependence that the process of identification develops. Because the mother initially satisfies the biological needs, the child becomes dependent on her. He adopts many of her actions because they are self-reinforcing. Dependency is strengthened by occasional withdrawal of mother’s love; for example when she is absent, attending to other duties in the house.

Then the child performs some of the actions of the mother to achieve satisfac­tion. According to Sears, if the mother is always present and nurturant, the child will have little occasion to copy her action in order to obtain self-reinforcement; similarly if she is not nurturant or is disap­proving or punitive, the child will not be motivated to reproduce her actions.

Thus, the motive to identify is achieved when the child is given affection and nurturance which are periodically withdrawn so that the child will be rewarded by reproducing the mother’s behaviour.

ADVERTISEMENTS:


Another aspect of the dependence process is the fact that the child, at a later age, is very dependent on the parents for information about the environment, its meaning and his possibilities for action in it. Though he learns much about his surroundings through his own mani­pulative exploration, he also depends on the communications from others; he seeks clarification from others.

Thus, we may think of two kinds of dependence:

(a) Effect-depen­dence—dependence on others for the provision of food, protection, etc., the control of rewards and punishments; and

(b) Information-depen­dence, the provision of information regarding the objects, persons, events, etc., the control of the child’s cognitive structure.


By selectively presenting certain explanations for events the socializing agents can in­fluence the child’s conception of reality and his interpretation of his experiences. It is obvious that the parents play a very important role both with respect to the control of stimuli that reinforce the child, and for selecting particular responses of which the child is capable of, and with respect to his information, outlook, attitudes, etc., regarding the world and the events in the world.

The Reference Group:

As the child grows up, the socializing process is increasingly affected by the actions of the persons outside the family. The teachers as well as the members of the peer group play a very im­portant role. The growing child and the adolescent become members of many groups and are influenced by the members of those groups.

How­ever, it must be recognized that all these groups are not equally impor­tant or influential in the formation of attitudes in the individual. Some groups like the caste group, the creedal group etc., are much more important in the present Indian society. This is why the concept of “refe­rence group” has now become important to explain how some groups rather than others have more profound influence on the individual.

A reference group is one in terms of which the individual views or evaluates himself; it is the group which provides the standards for evaluation. The more important the reference group, the greater will be the influence of its standards and norms on the individual. Hyman (1942) first used the concept of reference group in a study of subjective social status.

The need to define dependence arises out of accumulating evidence that it contributes to depression-proneness. Its accurate definition is therefore a prerequisite for the development of valid methods of measuring it. Because dependence is more a feature of childhood than of adulthood, a dependent person may usefully be viewed as an adult behaving as though he were a child. Dependence is best understood therefore in terms of those developmental deficiencies from which it results. These are failure to separate successfully from the principal parent figure and from the family as a whole, failure to establish a secure personal identity, failure to acquire a general feeling of competence and a realistic assessment of self-worth and failure to feel deserving of the status of adult and to feel on equal terms with other adults. Consequently, adult dependence is characterized by the need to stay close to others, the inclination to be primarily the recipient in interpersonal transactions and the tendency to relate to others from a position of inferiority and humility. The dependent person receives from others a borrowed identity, guidance and direction, compensation for those areas in which he is incompetent and, most important of all, acceptance, approval and affirmation of worth.

Children who sacrifice their own emotional needs to support a parent can end up struggling with identity and intimacy as adults, says psychologist Sarb Johal.

sad son hugging his motherPhoto: 123RF
When a child is required to sacrifice their own needs for attention, comfort and guidance for the sake of a parent's emotions, Johal calls this 'parentification'.

Kids meeting their parents' logistical needs – such as helping to cook, paying bills, shopping and caring for other siblings – he describes as 'instrumental parentification'.

This isn't damaging as long as the child is getting support and participating in whatever age-appropriate activities they're into, he says.

It can even give kids a sense of accomplishment.

The real damage, Johal says, comes from 'emotional parentification' – when a child is expected to gauge and respond to a parent's emotional needs.

Children called on to act as confidants or crisis managers can carry a lot of guilt about failing to meet these needs, he says.

This experience can also interfere with their ability to form strong relationships into adulthood, especially with peers.

"Children can feel very fulfilled in that role, but the detriment is they're not having the time to create and explore and understand how to create those relationships with people of their own age group."

happy kid with motherPhoto: 123RF
Children who were 'emotionally parentified' can become adults who are anxious about abandonment and loss and find it difficult to deal with disappointment and rejection, Johal says.

In intimate relationships, they often naturally assume a caring role which eventually becomes burdensome.

"They flick in and out of being caring and feeling quite resentful of having this put upon them."

These adults tend to be controlling in their relationships because they don't trust other people to sort things out, he says.

"They'll say I had to do this as a child, I had to sort everything out."

A relationship of equality is a mystery to them, he says.

"I'm used to stepping up and sorting things out so that's how I'm going to be in my relationship, too – even if it's not asked for or required."

If this was your experience, it's a good start to simply realise you have a strong template to be a caregiver in a relationship, Johal says.

Keep an eye on the kind of relationships you're drawn towards or get into.

Be aware that empathetic people can easily be exploited in relationships as they often unconsciously prioritise their partner's needs over their own.

Learn how to identify your own emotional needs and get them met.

happy mother and sonPhoto: Bruno Nascimento / Unsplash
Also be aware that a tendency to lean too hard on your child is frequently transmitted through generations, he says.

While it's wonderful to be close to your own child, a 'best friends' type relationship can indicate too much emotional dependence.

If that is your situation, think hard about what you are seeking from that relationship and how and where else you can get emotional support, Johal says.

Listen to Sarb Johal discuss 'parentification' of children and, at the other end of the lifespan, adult children caring for older parents.

“Dependence” and “dependency” are both words that reference reliance upon someone or something else for support. In short, “dependence” is a quality of reliance and “dependency” is the act or state of being dependent.

Therefore, a fine line distinguishes these nouns. But, you can think of it in terms of the tangible (dependency) versus the abstract (dependence).

“Dependence” Definition
“Dependence” is an uncountable noun in the abstract referring to someone (or other living being) who relies on someone or something outside of themselves for survival, achievement, or success. It can also refer to an addiction, signifying an irrational overreliance on a substance.


But, it can also refer to a situation where one thing must first occur in order for the next step in a process can continue. Consider the examples below:

The elderly have a dependence on their pensions.

Mass drug dependence is a reflection of a weak and broken society.

Politicians’ dependence on voters is crucial to getting into office.


“Dependency” Definition
“Dependency” can be an uncountable noun but also a countable or variable one with a galvanized implication. It’s more tangible, concrete and has a more physical presence.

This can relate to someone’s control over another person or thing. It can also mean someone’s overreliance on something. However, “dependency” can indicate addiction.

Countable: The United States has a dependency on the Federal Reserve.
Uncountable: Maxwell’s dependency on his mother can be concerning at times.
Variable: Alcohol dependency has grown exponentially in the last few years.
Mnemonic Device
The best way to understand the difference between “dependence” and “dependency” is to pay attention to the suffixes at the end of each. These are –ence and –ency.

–ence is the abstract quality of being dependent

–ency is the concrete state of being dependent

Consider the separation of definitions in the examples below:

Gambling dependence is a growing problem among the unemployed.

Many unemployed people tend to pick up a gambling dependency.

Welfare systems end create dependency on the government.

It’s almost as if the government wants people to have a dependence on welfare.

Conclusion
The good news about “dependence” and “dependency” is that they are often interchangeable. So, even if you make a mistake, it won’t usually be too strange or awkward. Just remember that “dependence” is the quality and “dependency” is the state of having to rely on someone or something else.

Cannabis Use Disorder (CUD) is the dependence on marijuana / cannabis to feel good regardless of its mental and physical damage. THC is the main psychoactive element of marijuana / cannabis, with mind-altering and health-damaging abilities such as permanent loss of IQ (if started young), significant driving and athletic impairment, growth and brain development damage in utero, low motivation—which damages relationships, schooling outcomes, and job performance—and possible depression, psychotic and suicidal thoughts, and anxiety.
Marijuana can be smoked, vaporized, cooked into food, or diffused in drinks or other liquids. Smoking THC resins in the form of hash oil, wax, budder, or shatter delivers dangerously higher amounts of THC. Vaping THC is causing hundreds of severe lung diseases and several deaths. The onset of the effects of cannabis is usually felt within minutes when smoked and can last for two to six hours, depending on the amount used.

Prevalence
In the United States, approximately 50% of the population has used marijuana / cannabis, with numbers rising; and approximately 9 to 30% of users develop cannabis dependence. The largest group of marijuana users are those in the 18 to 25 age group, with almost 4% of 18-year-olds vaping THC daily.

Recreational use of marijuana has been legalized in some countries and US states.

Medical use of marijuana, requiring the approval of a physician, has been legalized in a greater number of countries.

SYMPTOMS
Symptoms of Cannabis Dependence or Abuse:
Marijuana has multiple mental and physical effects.

Mental effects – include euphoria, disinhibition, impaired judgment, altered states of mind, altered sense of time, mood changes, difficulty thinking or concentrating, tiredness, relaxation, confusion, anxiety, paranoia, and defective short-term memory. Hallucinations, delusions, and psychosis can be experienced with higher doses.
Physical effects – include a faster heart rate, decreased blood pressure, difficulty breathing, dizziness, nausea, dry mouth, red eyes, poor coordination, distorted perception, awkward or impaired body movements, sedation, and an increase in appetite.

Dependence on Videogames is declared a sickness by the W.H.O.
Dependence on Videogames is declared a sickness by the W.H.O.
The excessive use of videogames can create dependency. To support it, this time, it is not only parents and educators worried about what for many young people is becoming more than just an obsession; furthermore, the World Health Organization that has inserted the gaming disorder in the eleventh edition of the diagnostic manual of the International Classification Diseases (ICD). Cited under the heading "disorders due to addictive behaviors," the compulsive use of video games is considered like other gambling disorders, like betting and poker, alongside other already classified addictions, such as drugs and alcohol. The new ICD will be published in mid-2018 (more than twenty years after the previous one, released in the nineties), but online, on the WHO website, the document has already been available since January.

The gaming disorder

What is gaming disorder? In the draft, the question, expressly posed, is followed by a concise and detailed answer: "a pattern of gaming behavior (“digital-gaming” or “video-gaming”) characterized by impaired control over gaming, increasing priority given to gaming over other activities to the extent that gaming takes precedence over other interests and daily activities, and continuation or escalation of gaming despite the occurrence of negative consequences." And furthermore, " For gaming disorder to be diagnosed, the behavior pattern must be of sufficient severity to result in significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning and would normally have been evident for at least 12 months.”

The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) is the basis for the identification of health trends and statistics at the global level and, at the same time, serves as an international standard for the reporting of diseases and health conditions, a sort of reference point used by doctors and researchers all over the world to diagnose and classify patients' conditions.

The decision to include the gaming disorder in the ICD-11 is based on the in-depth study of the evidence available worldwide and it is the result of the consensus of experts from the various disciplines involved in that field.

The inclusion of the gaming disorder in the new list of diseases of the WHO comes after years of analysis on the danger represented by excessive technological gaming, both online and offline, regardless of the device used (PC, console, tablet, smartphone). Numerous studies have been brought forth and published, studies carried out in the medical field, but also in the socio-psycho-pedagogical use and abuse of 'connection', for play purposes, on the part of not only adolescents and adults, but also by children. It was a couple of years ago that the research published by the famous magazine Jama Pediatrics showed that electronic games, in which the aim is to kill or raid, make children unable to comprehend the consequences of violence.

And, before that, in 2013 the American Academy of Pediatrics detected the dangers of new media when the exposure and use of new technologies by children and adolescents became excessive.

A call for caution without alarmism. Some good advice

The research, however, also shows that the disorder affects only a small percentage of people who engage in digital gaming or videogames. But they somehow invite those who use it to pay greater attention to the amount of time that is spent playing, in particular when this involves the exclusion of other daily activities, or changes in physical and psychological health are noticed in social relations that could be attributed directly to their way of playing.

So no alarm, but attention – caution – to the players, this, yes. And for doctors, especially those already involved in the field, a further step forward in the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of the disorder, which could benefit from a shared approach, from the exchange of data and statistics, from the elaboration of study programs and a wide-range research.

To worry, must be the addiction, the excess, the desire to play at all costs, a kind of irrepressible instinct, like that which unfortunately, can hit many who, literally caught, captured by the game, end up losing the contact with reality. Kids like everyone who play for hours and hours, even late at night, looking for the most modern and technological videogame... According to some, social withdrawal is often caused by overbearing parents who prefer not to let their children go out, out of their own laziness and to also keep them under control, or for fear of what's out there. While, in the case of younger children, videogames play the role of baby-sitter, and they even end up replacing the television. For the older ones, however, the ‘web’ often becomes the only space for socializing, and the virtual multimedia game replaces real life. The invitation then, addressed to parents, is to spend more time with their children. It has been observed, in fact, that even the dependence on videogames develops in those who are already fragile personalities and live in situations of hardship often due to a real absence of parents, if not explicitly experienced, at least perceived as lack of sharing - absence of attention. In essence, often, the dependence on videogames represents the effect of the difficulty of parents to relate to their children and that can generate social isolation, which may drive to videogame addiction. This is what happens, in the most extreme cases, in Japan where there is a very high number of hikikomori, adolescents who refuse the world and stayed behind closed doors, avoiding any contact with the surrounding reality, glued to the internet and often to video games, a phenomenon we have already talked about in our portal.

The real challenge is not to forbid but to educate

Videogames should not be demonized, but rather controlled . The advice – it’s imaginable – could be imprinted on a box that contains the phrase: 'handle with care', that care that is needed in all educational and training processes, in the various stages of development of the person and his character. In fact, the videogame is able to offer numerous opportunities. So it is straight from these new studies that it is possible to re-start for an analysis of videogames that takes into account potentials and dangers, and help educators and parents to act as cultural mediators of a process, playful, but also educational, functional at an adequate and conscious use, according to the age of the player/user, of a technological means that has become part of our daily life. Because, both the studies and the clinical analysis prove it: the risk of going from use to the abuse of videogames also depends on the relationship that young people establish with their peers and with adults in authoritative positions, from the conscious control by parents upon their children, from the state of dissatisfaction, discomfort, when it comes to subjects who no longer are very young and for whom the game goes from being a moment of leisure to an escape from reality.

The game studies, moreover, in some way invite us to consider videogames not only as a means of entertainment, but as a tool capable of producing multiple languages ​​and styles of communication, for which, therefore, especially according to some scholars (Bissel) the narrative and expressive dimension, more than their formal, technical, eminently playful aspect, should be predominant. For the innovative scope of the experience and for its ethical value, an educational project dedicated to video games, made at the Francisco de Vitoria University in Madrid by Arturo Encinas Cantalapiedra and Alberto Oliván Tenorio, received a special mention in the first edition of the prized Razón Abierta, organized by the Ratzinger Foundation. "La enseñanza de la Narración en Videojuegos o cómo relatamos nuestra vida a través del videojuego", is a course that aims to guide future videogame makers in their professional work, both from the technical point of view and from the point of view of the values that audio visual creations could convey. It is a path designed for the training of experts in the sector who are able to develop attractive videogames, consistent with the dignity of the person, that is the player who is always a person, and the person who is represented in the game through fictional characters.

What Is Substance Dependence?
Substance Dependence
Substance dependence occurs when a person is physically dependent on a substance such as alcohol, nicotine, drugs, or medication, to the extent that their body adapts to it and develops a tolerance to it, resulting in withdrawal symptoms when they stop using it.1

It is a complex condition that affects the person’s brain, body, and behavior.2


Substance dependence and substance abuse used to be classified as separate health conditions in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), which is the guiding manual for diagnosing mental health conditions.3 However, the latest edition, DSM-5, has included both conditions under the umbrella term of substance use disorder.4


According to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), approximately 20 million people in the United States over the age of 12 experienced a substance use disorder in 2019.5 It is estimated that substance use disorders cost the United States $420 billion dollars a year.6


This article explores the symptoms, causes, stages, and treatment of substance dependence, also known as substance use disorder.


If you or a loved one are struggling with substance dependence or addiction, contact the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) National Helpline at 1-800-662-4357 for information on support and treatment facilities in your area.

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

Commonly Used Substances
These are some of the most commonly used types of substances:7


Depressants, which reduce anxiety and cause drowsiness. Depressants include alcohol as well as certain types of medications such as benzodiazepines (Valium, Xanax, and Ativan), barbiturates, chloral hydrate, and paraldehyde. 
Stimulants, which stimulate the brain and nervous system. Stimulants include drugs like cocaine and amphetamines. Amphetamines are also used in certain stimulant medications, like Ritalin, that help treat conditions like ADHD.
Hallucinogens, which cause people to hear or see things that don’t exist. Hallucinogens include drugs such as LSD, psilocybin (commonly known as mushrooms), mescaline, and phencyclidine (known as PCP or angel dust).
Opiates and narcotics, are strong painkillers that reduce pain, induce drowsiness, and produce feelings of well-being, happiness, and excitement. Opiates include drugs like heroin and opium, as well as pain-relieving medications, such as Vicodin and morphine.
Marijuana, which produces a sense of happiness, calm, and relaxation.


 4 Types of Commonly Abused Medications

Substance Dependence Symptoms
These are some of the symptoms and behaviors associated with substance dependence and substance use disorder:7


Needing the substance on a daily basis
Developing a tolerance to the substance and needing to take more of it over time to achieve the same effect
Losing control over use of the substance and being unable to stop using it
Experiencing withdrawal symptoms upon stopping one’s use of the substance
Spending a lot of time procuring, using, and recovering from the aftereffects of the substance
Using the substance in risky settings
Missing school or work, or performing poorly
Avoiding recreational and social activities due to substance use
Continuing to use the substance despite negative consequences to one’s family, work, and health
Making excuses to use the substance
Using the substance when alone 
Resorting to secretive behaviors to hide one’s use of the substance
Becoming hostile when confronted with one’s substance dependence
Neglecting to eat and maintain personal hygiene

 When Does Drug Use Become an Addiction?
Stages of Substance Use 
Substance use often progresses in stages, which can include:7

Experimentation: This stage often involves trying different substances with one’s peers, sometimes with the goal of defying one’s parents or other authority figures.
Regular use: This stage involves using the substance more often, displaying an increased ability to handle it, and starting to develop a tolerance to it. The person may use the substance to try and fix negative feelings. Their loved ones may notice that they are starting to miss school or work, and that they spend less time with their family and friends and more time with people who are misusing drugs as well.
Dependence: Dependence occurs when the person’s body adapts to the substance and becomes physically dependent on it, causing them to need more and more of it to achieve the same effect.1
Problematic use: The person prioritizes their use of the substance over everything else, including their relationships, school, work, family, and other interests. They lose all motivation to do anything else and display significant behavior changes. They may worry about losing their source of the substance, engage in risky or secretive behaviors to obtain more of it or even start selling it themselves, to support their habit.
Addiction: In this stage, the person loses control over their use of the substance and cannot face everyday life without it. They deny that they have a problem despite mounting health issues, family conflicts, financial difficulties, and legal problems as a result of their substance use. 
Young people generally go through these stages much faster than adults do.7

Causes of Substance Dependence
According to the American Psychiatric Association (APA), addictive substances like alcohol and drugs cause changes in the brain that trigger intense cravings for the substance.2

However, the APA explains that as the brain and body adapt to the effects of the substance, the person needs to consume more and more of it to achieve the same effect. This leads to a cycle of addiction and dependence that contributes to substance use disorder.

A combination of factors can contribute to the risk of developing substance use disorder, including:8

Social pressures
Environmental stressors 
Genetic vulnerability
Individual personality characteristics
Mental health conditions
 Why Does It Seem Like Everyone Has More Than One Mental Illness?
Diagnosing Substance Dependence
If you suspect you may have become physically dependent on a prescription medication that your healthcare provider has asked you to take, contact the physician who prescribed the medication to you. 

On the other hand, if you think you have become dependent on a substance such as alcohol, drugs, nicotine, or prescription medication that you’re not supposed to be taking, contact a healthcare provider such as your family doctor or primary care physician. They can diagnose your condition or refer you to a healthcare provider who can.

Your healthcare provider will determine whether your symptoms match the criteria for substance use disorder listed in the DSM-5. Depending on how many symptoms you have, your condition may be classified as mild, moderate, or severe.4

Substance Dependence Treatment
Treatment for substance dependence can vary depending on factors such as:8

Age
Medical history
Symptom severity
Dependence severity
Type of substance used
Tolerance for medication, procedures, and other treatments
Lifestyle and personal preference
Treatment Approaches for Substance Use Disorder
Treatment approaches for substance use disorder include:2

Detoxification, to help flush the substance out of the person’s system. The detox process may need to be undertaken at a hospital or treatment facility if the person is at risk of experiencing severe withdrawal symptoms or health complications.
Medication, to treat any withdrawal symptoms, reduce cravings for certain substances, and prevent relapse.
Therapy, to help the person explore their motivations and behaviors, cope with stressors and triggers, and address any other mental health conditions they may have. Therapy can be performed on an individual basis or group basis, and may involve partners or family members.
Rehabilitation, or rehab, which involves staying in a treatment facility for a certain period of time.
Mutual-aid groups, such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), Narcotics Anonymous (NA), Cocaine Anonymous (CA), or SMART Recovery, that follows a peer-based recovery model.
 How to Stop an Addiction
A Word From Verywell
Substance dependence and addiction are complex conditions; however, they are treatable. If you or a loved one are experiencing dependence, it’s important to seek help and treatment as soon as possible.
 What Does a Substance Abuse Counselor Do?
 
 What is substance use disorder?
The main words used medically to describe substance abuse or addiction include the following:

Substance (drug) abuse (alcohol or other drugs)
Substance abuse is the medical term used to describe a pattern of using a substance (drug) that causes significant problems or distress. This may be missing work or school, using the substance in dangerous situations, such as driving a car. It may lead to substance-related legal problems, or continued substance use that interferes with friendships, family relationships, or both. Substance abuse, as a recognized medical brain disorder, refers to the abuse of illegal substances, such as marijuana, heroin, cocaine, or methamphetamine. Or it may be the abuse of legal substances, such as alcohol, nicotine, or prescription medicines. Alcohol is the most common legal drug of abuse.

Substance (drug) dependence
Substance dependence is the medical term used to describe abuse of drugs or alcohol that continues even when significant problems related to their use have developed. Signs of dependence include:

Tolerance to or need for increased amounts of the drug to get an effect

Withdrawal symptoms that happen if you decrease or stop using the drug that you find difficult to cut down or quit

Spending a lot of time to get, use, and recover from the effects of using drugs

Withdrawal from social and recreational activities

Continued use of the drug even though you are aware of the physical, psychological, and family or social problems that are caused by your ongoing drug abuse

What substances are most often abused?
Substances frequently abused include:

Alcohol

Marijuana

Prescription medicines, such as pain pills, stimulants, or anxiety pills

Methamphetamine

Cocaine

Opiates

Hallucinogens

Inhalants

What causes drug abuse or dependence?
Cultural and societal factors determine what are acceptable or allowable forms of drug or alcohol use. Public laws determine what kind of drug use is legal or illegal. The question of what type of substance use can be considered normal or acceptable remains controversial. Substance abuse and dependence are caused by multiple factors, including genetic vulnerability, environmental stressors, social pressures, individual personality characteristics, and psychiatric problems. But which of these factors has the biggest influence in any one person cannot be determined in all cases.

What are the symptoms of drug abuse or dependence?
The following are the most common behaviors that mean a person is having a problem with drug or alcohol abuse. But each person may have slightly different symptoms. Symptoms may include:

Using or drinking larger amounts or over longer periods of time than planned.

Continually wanting or unsuccessfully trying to cut down or control use of drugs or alcohol.

Spending a lot of time getting, using, or recovering from use of drugs or alcohol.

Craving, or a strong desire to use drugs or alcohol.

Ongoing drug or alcohol use that interferes with work, school, or home duties.

Using drugs or alcohol even with continued relationship problems caused by use.

Giving up or reducing activities because of drug or alcohol use

Taking risks, such as sexual risks or driving under the influence.

Continually using drugs or alcohol even though it is causing or adding to physical or psychological problems.

Developing tolerance or the need to use more drugs or alcohol to get the same effect. Or using the same amount of drugs or alcohol, but without the same effect.

Having withdrawal symptoms if not using drugs or alcohol. Or using alcohol or another drug to avoid such symptoms.

The symptoms of drug or alcohol abuse may resemble other medical problems or psychiatric conditions. Always consult your doctor for a diagnosis.

How is drug abuse or dependence diagnosed?
A family doctor, psychiatrist, or qualified mental health professional usually diagnoses substance abuse. Clinical findings often depend on the substance abused, the frequency of use, and the length of time since last used, and may include:

Weight loss

Constant fatigue

Red eyes

Little concern for hygiene

Lab abnormalities

Unexpected abnormalities in heart rate or blood pressure

Depression, anxiety, or sleep problems

Treatment for drug abuse or dependence
Specific treatment for drug abuse or dependence will be determined by your doctor based on:

Your age, overall health, and health history

Extent of the symptoms

Extent of the dependence

Type of substance abused

Your tolerance for specific medicines, procedures, or therapies

Expectations for the course of the condition

Your opinion or preference

A variety of treatment (or recovery) programs for substance abuse are available on an inpatient or outpatient basis. Programs considered are usually based on the type of substance abused. Detoxification (if needed, based on the substance abused) and long-term follow-up management or recovery-oriented systems of care are important features of successful treatment. Long-term follow-up management usually includes formalized group meetings and psychosocial support systems, as well as continued medical supervision. Individual and family psychotherapy are often recommended to address the issues that may have contributed to and resulted from the development of a substance abuse disorder.

What is drug dependence?

Drug dependence occurs when you need one or more drugs to function. The American Psychiatric Association (APA) used to distinguish between dependence and abuse. Abuse was considered the mild or early phase of inappropriate drug use that led to dependence. People viewed dependence as a more severe problem than abuse.

The APA replaced “dependence” and “abuse” with “substance use disorder” in the 2013 edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). This diagnosis focuses on the disorder involving the use of the substance.


Drug dependence vs. drug addiction
People sometimes use the terms “addiction” and “dependence” interchangeably. Dependence is not the same as addiction.

Addiction
Addiction can occur without being dependent on drugs.

Addiction may involve:

using drugs despite the consequences
being unable to stop using drugs
neglecting social and work obligations because of drug use
Dependence
It’s possible to be dependent on drugs without being addicted. Dependence can be a bodily response to a substance. This often occurs if you rely on medications to control a chronic medical condition. These conditions may include:

high blood pressure
diabetes
glaucoma
Dependence may involve:

some or all the symptoms of addiction
development of a high tolerance for the substance as your body adapts to the drug, leading to a desire for larger or more frequent doses
physical symptoms of withdrawal when you attempt to stop using the drug
How drug abuse can lead to dependence
The National Institute on Drug AbuseTrusted Source estimates 22.7 million Americans need help treating a drug or alcohol problem. In some cases, people may take a prescription medication for pain or another medical condition. This kind of use can sometimes develop into a substance use disorder.

The following are known triggers for substance use disorders:

having a family history of addiction
living in an environment where illegal drugs are often used and easy to access
having a history of anxiety
having a history of depression
having a history of other mental health conditions
Drug users typically pass through certain stages on the way to drug dependence. One way that healthcare providers describe these stages is with the Jellinek Curve. The curve tracks typical stages experienced through occasional use, dependence, disorder, and rehabilitation.

These stages include:

You use drugs for recreation. You take them infrequently and in social settings.
You start using drugs on a regular basis, often abandoning family and friends in favor of drug use. You become concerned about losing access to drugs.
You become addicted to drugs as you become more tolerant to their effects and preoccupied with getting them. You may abandon most or all your previous interests and relationships.
You become dependent on drugs and unable to live without them. Your physical and mental health deteriorates.

Recognizing the symptoms of drug dependence
You can often determine if an addiction has turned into dependence by looking at behavior. When a person addicted to drugs hasn’t had them for a period of time, this can cause a physical reaction. Physical symptoms of withdrawal occur when the body becomes stressed without the drug. These symptoms include:

anxiety
depression
muscle weakness
nightmares
body aches
sweating
nausea
vomiting
What drugs are most likely to cause dependency?
Treating drug dependence
When drug abuse escalates to dependence, treatment becomes complicated. You must stop using the drug, but doing so abruptly can cause physical symptoms. You may need the help of a healthcare provider to rid your body of the substance. This can be done on an inpatient or outpatient basis.

Substances that mimic the effects of illegal drugs may help reduce the symptoms of withdrawal during treatment. Detox programs use a combination of therapy and medical treatment to ease dependence and treat the disorder. Ongoing therapy sessions may be needed after you’re released from a treatment program.

Extreme cases of intoxication, withdrawal, or overdose may need emergency care before addiction and dependence can be treated.

Long-term outlook for people with drug dependence
If left untreated, dependence on illicit drugs can be dangerous. You may increase your drug use as your body adapts to the drugs. This can result in overdose or death.

Treatment can reverse dependence, but you must want to be treated. Sometimes, treatment is successful the first time, but relapse is common. Ongoing therapy and support groups can help you recover, stay on track, and address symptoms of relapse.

If you notice any physical symptoms after receiving treatment at a substance abuse treatment center in Topeka, you are physically dependent on substances. If you suffer from physical dependence, your brain has been trained to rely on that substance and experience severe physical withdrawal symptoms.

What Causes a Physical Addiction?
You don’t need to be abusing substances to develop a physical addiction. Physical addictions can also occur from prescribed, addictive drugs. This is commonly seen during treatment post-surgery. Addictive prescriptions can also be used for chronic pain and pain related to diseases, such as cancer.

Taking these medicines as prescribed can still cause a physical dependency, and you can experience withdrawal symptoms when you stop taking them. The severity of withdrawal symptoms will depend on:

How long you have been taking the prescription
How much you take
Your physical trait (weight, height, etc.)
Substance Abuse Treatment Center In Topeka

How Do You Treat a Physical Dependence?
The most efficient way to treat a physical dependence is to seek help at drug treatment centers in Topeka. Treating a physical dependence begins with medical detox. This is what will happen at a substance abuse treatment center in Topeka. A trained physician will help you through the detox process. They will monitor your vital signs and make sure you are safe and as comfortable as possible during the detox process.

Once you have completed the medical detox, you might need to enroll in therapy sessions or require medication. Ridding your body of a physical dependency is taxing on both your body and mind, and it may take some time for you to heal fully.

When you receive care at alcohol rehab facilities in Topeka, they should include psychiatric care. This is vital for improving your mental health after the detox stage. If needed, a psychiatrist can prescribe you anxiety or anti-depressants to make the recovery process easier.

Substance Abuse Treatment Center In Topeka

Check to see if your drug and alcohol addiction treatment center in Topeka offers additional care. Many treatment centers offer services such as massage therapy, chiropractic services, and acupuncture. These additional treatments have been shown to make the recovery process easier. They also provide an alternative to pain medication.

If you are suffering from a physical dependence, immediately seek help at a substance abuse treatment center in Topeka. You will not only receive treatment for the physical detox symptoms but will receive mental support as well.

Substance Abuse Treatment Center In Topeka

Are You Looking for the Best Drug and Alcohol Addiction Treatment Center in Topeka?
If you or someone you love is battling substance abuse in Topeka, please reach out to our Gold Bridge Treatment Center staff. You can call us at 913-837-4653 or contact us online. We are experts in alcohol and drug treatment in Topeka and specialize in helping individuals make changes for a happier, healthier life. We offer group counseling, individual counseling and inpatient treatment services.

At Gold Bridge Treatment Center staff strive to be the drug and alcohol treatment center in the Topeka area. We are located just a short drive away, in Louisburg, KS.

The previous edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), a diagnostic reference text that many in the health care field use to help typify and define mental health issues such as substance abuse, included separate categories for the concepts of both drug dependence and drug abuse.

Drug dependence was defined as a maladaptive pattern of drug use, marked by the development of drug tolerance and the existence of withdrawal effects as well as having a persistent desire but inability to mitigate one’s drug use.

The new edition’s (DSM-V) broader diagnostic category of ‘substance use disorder’ has absorbed the criteria for dependence as part of a spectrum of severity of specific substance use disorders. Drug dependence, as a concept removed from diagnostic concerns, remains a troublesome reality, however.

What Is Drug Dependence?
The inability to cut down or quit using despite one’s best efforts to do so is a diagnostic hallmark of substance dependency and drug addiction.

At a basic level, when an individual is experiencing drug dependence, it means that the individual feels he needs to use drugs in order to function. There are many people suffering from chronic pain that have become dependent on their medication, but are not actually abusing it. Unfortunately, the more common scenario is the individual that has become dependent on a medication due to drug abuse. Drug dependence can occur with prescription drugs, illicit drugs, or alcohol.

Today’s society is laden with persons dealing with drug dependency issues. Whether in the midst of drug dependency or drug addiction, family and friends are usually affected. Treatment for drug dependence in a qualified drug and alcohol rehab center is the best way for all to recover physically, psychologically, socially and spiritually.


Credit: sobrietytelevision

Verify Your Benefits
What is your addiction really costing you? Getting clean is within your reach.
American Addiction Centers (AAC) is here to help.

Your insurance may cover all or some of your rehab at an AAC Facility.

Check My Coverage
Contributing Factors and Causes
Drug dependency has many contributing causes that are categorized as:

Genetics.
Peer pressures.
Emotional distress.
Environmental surroundings.
Very often children who grew up surrounded by drug dependency become drug abusers and have elevated potential to become addicts. In recent studies, half the patients suffering drug dependency also suffer:

Depression.
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Bipolar disorder.
Post-traumatic stress disorder.
The co-occurrence of drug addiction and a mental disorder is what is known as a dual diagnosis. Research has shown that people with psychiatric problems are much more prone to addiction than others. Dual diagnosis illness is treatable and research has shown that the best way to treat dual diagnosis illness is by addressing both the chemical dependency and the emotional or psychiatric illness concurrently.

Can’t Stop Using
Why can’t many people with drug dependencies quit on their own? Many struggling with drug abuse and addiction are under the belief, at least to begin with, that simply asserting one’s willpower can lead to a decrease in drug use. A lot of these people try, at least once, to stop on their own – without the assistance of anyone. Very few are successful, however, especially in the long-term, and it’s not surprising that this is the case.

The phenomenon of drug dependency occurs, at least in part, as a result of changes in the brain. New synaptic pathways or neural connections have been created which reinforce the desire to continue using the drug. These changes can persist long after the last instance of drug use. So, even if one is successful in quitting at the outset, the changes made to the brain during the period of active drug use can, essentially, sabotage efforts to resist the impulse to use drugs again. The inability to cut down or quit using despite one’s best efforts to do so is a diagnostic hallmark of substance dependency and drug addiction.

Drug Dependency Recovery
Awareness of a strong biological component to dependency and addiction helps to understand why it is so hard for those suffering from drug addiction to quit on their own. Compounding the difficulty is the fact that numerous forms of life stressors (work, social relationships, financial, etc.) and situational triggers (sights, locations and people associated with previous drug behavior) can all serve to stimulate the ‘re-wired’ brain pathways and lead to powerful cravings for the drug.

Despite the biological reinforcement factors and stubbornness of a drug dependency, there is hope. Addiction treatment research indicates that individuals who dedicate themselves by actively participating in treatment programs can do much to undo the negative changes that have occurred and achieve good recovery outcomes.


Credit: ehowhealth

Ready to take back control? Take the next step in recovery and find life-changing addiction treatment at one of American Addiction Centers’ (AAC) nationwide locations.

Begin Admissions
Treatment for Drug Dependency
For many types of substances, when the user discontinues their drug use, withdrawal symptoms emerge. These vary, and can range from moderate discomfort to severe and even life-threatening effects. In order to receive the best care possible, drug dependent individuals should seek proper treatment in a licensed and accredited drug addiction treatment center.

There are proven detox treatments under board certified medical professional care that are designed to manage the withdrawal symptoms associated with drug dependency in order to decrease or eliminate them altogether. It is advisable that anyone with a long-standing drug dependency undergo a supervised detox under the watch of a professional.

In an inpatient rehab center, various methods of addiction counseling and treatment will follow the acute period of drug detox. This period of treatment can last from 30-90 days, or longer if required. One of the benefits of treatment centers for drug dependency is their commitment to aftercare relapse prevention programs.

Treatment centers analyze the drug dependency issues a person has prior to discharge and design individualized treatment plans to assist in keeping each patient clean and sober. Whatever recovery tools they have learned in drug dependency treatment, become necessary to use after treatment. The goal is to utilize everything learned in treatment to enjoy a long recovery.

Rehab centers are located throughout the U.S. and can cater to individual needs. American Addiction Centers (AAC) is a leading provider of addicti0n treatment programs and has trusted facilities across the country. For advice on finding the best treatment for drug dependency, you can contact AAC free 24/7 at (877) 367-2510
Helpline Information
 or get a text. All calls are confidential. You can also contact free narcotics and drug abuse hotline numbers.

Alcohol Dependence, Withdrawal, and Relapse
Howard C. Becker, Ph.D.
Author information Copyright and License information Disclaimer
See "In this Issue" on page 287.
Go to:
Abstract
Continued excessive alcohol consumption can lead to the development of dependence that is associated with a withdrawal syndrome when alcohol consumption is ceased or substantially reduced. This syndrome comprises physical signs as well as psychological symptoms that contribute to distress and psychological discomfort. For some people the fear of withdrawal symptoms may help perpetuate alcohol abuse; moreover, the presence of withdrawal symptoms may contribute to relapse after periods of abstinence. Withdrawal and relapse have been studied in both humans and animal models of alcoholism. Clinical studies demonstrated that alcohol-dependent people are more sensitive to relapse-provoking cues and stimuli than nondependent people, and similar observations have been made in animal models of alcohol dependence, withdrawal, and relapse. One factor contributing to relapse is withdrawal-related anxiety, which likely reflects adaptive changes in the brain in response to continued alcohol exposure. These changes affect, for example, the body’s stress response system. The relationship between withdrawal, stress, and relapse also has implications for the treatment of alcoholic patients. Interestingly, animals with a history of alcohol dependence are more sensitive to certain medications that impact relapse-like behavior than animals without such a history, suggesting that it may be possible to develop medications that specifically target excessive, uncontrollable alcohol consumption.

Keywords: Alcoholism, alcohol dependence, alcohol and other drug (AOD) effects and consequences, neuroadaptation, AOD withdrawal syndrome, AOD dependence relapse, pharmacotherapy, human studies, animal studies
The development of alcohol dependence is a complex and dynamic process. Many neurobiological and environmental factors influence motivation to drink (Grant 1995; Samson and Hodge 1996; Vengeliene et al. 2008; Weiss 2005). At any given time, an individual’s propensity to imbibe is thought to reflect a balance between alcohol’s positive reinforcing (i.e., rewarding) effects, such as euphoria and reduction of anxiety (i.e., anxiolysis), and the drug’s aversive effects, which typically are associated with negative consequences of alcohol consumption (e.g., hangover or withdrawal symptoms). Memories associated with these rewarding and aversive qualities of alcohol, as well as learned associations between these internal states and related environmental stimuli or contexts, influence both the initiation and regulation of intake. These experiential factors, together with biological and environmental influences and social forces, are central to the formation of expectations about the consequences of alcohol use. These expectations, in turn, shape an individual’s decision about engaging in drinking behavior.

The nature of and extent to which these factors are operable in influencing decisions about drinking not only vary from one individual to another but also depend on the stage of addiction—that is, whether the drinker is at the stage of initial experience with alcohol, early problem drinking, or later excessive consumption associated with dependence. Although many people abuse alcohol without meeting the criteria for alcohol dependence,1 continued excessive alcohol consumption can lead to the development of dependence. Neuroadaptive changes that result from continued alcohol use and abuse (which manifest as tolerance and physiological dependence) are thought to be crucial in the transition from controlled alcohol use to more frequent and excessive, uncontrollable drinking (Koob and Le Moal 2008). Indeed, for some dependent individuals, the fear that withdrawal symptoms might emerge if they attempt to stop or significantly curtail drinking may prominently contribute to the perpetuation of alcohol use and abuse.

This article will provide an overview of the basic features of alcohol dependence and the associated withdrawal syndrome, emphasizing those components of withdrawal that especially are thought to contribute to the problem of relapse. It will present evidence from both clinical and experimental studies that highlights long-lasting physiological and emotional changes which are characteristic of dependence and have been postulated to play a key role in persistent vulnerability to relapse. In particular, it will review animal models of alcohol dependence and withdrawal, as well as models of self-administration, that have helped researchers elucidate brain mechanisms underlying relapse and excessive drinking associated with dependence.

Go to:
Alcohol Withdrawal
When an alcohol-dependent individual abruptly terminates or substantially reduces his or her alcohol consumption, a characteristic withdrawal syndrome ensues. In general, alcohol acts to suppress central nervous system (CNS) activity, and, as with other CNS depressants, withdrawal symptoms associated with cessation of chronic alcohol use are opposite in nature to the effects of intoxication. Typical clinical features of alcohol withdrawal include the following (Becker 2000; Hall and Zador 1997; Saitz 1998):

Signs of heightened autonomic nervous system2 activation, such as rapid heartbeat (i.e., tachycardia), elevated blood pressure, excessive sweating (i.e., diaphoresis), and shaking (i.e., tremor);
Excessive activity of the CNS (i.e., CNS hyperexcitability) that may culminate in motor seizures; and
Hallucinations and delirium tremens in the most severe form of withdrawal.
In addition to physical signs of withdrawal, a constellation of symptoms contributing to a state of distress and psychological discomfort constitute a significant component of the withdrawal syndrome (Anton and Becker 1995; Roelofs 1985; Schuckit et al. 1998). These symptoms include emotional changes such as irritability, agitation, anxiety, and dysphoria, as well as sleep disturbances, a sense of inability to experience pleasure (i.e., anhedonia), and frequent complaints about “achiness,” which possibly may reflect a reduced threshold for pain sensitivity. Many of these signs and symptoms, including those that reflect a negative-affect state (e.g., anxiety, distress, and anhedonia) also have been demonstrated in animal studies involving various models of dependence (Becker 2000).

Although many physical signs and symptoms of withdrawal typically abate within a few days, symptoms associated with psychological distress and dysphoria may linger for protracted periods of time (Anton and Becker 1995; De Soto et al. 1985; Martinotti et al. 2008). The persistence of these symptoms (e.g., anxiety, negative affect, altered reward set point manifesting as dysphoria and/or anhedonia) may constitute a significant motivational factor that leads to relapse to heavy drinking.

Go to:
Studying Alcohol Relapse Behavior
Relapse may be defined as the resumption of alcohol drinking following a prolonged period of abstinence. Clinically, vulnerability to relapse commonly is associated with an intense craving or desire to drink. Although a precise definition for craving remains elusive (Anton 1999; Koob 2000; Littleton 2000), and there even is some debate about the role of craving in relapse (Miller and Gold 1994; Rohsenow and Monti 1999; Tiffany and Carter 1998), there is no question that relapse represents a prevalent and significant problem in alcoholism. In fact, given the high rate of recidivism in alcoholism, relapse clearly is a major impediment to treatment efforts. Consequently, substantial research efforts have been directed at modeling relapse behavior, as well as elucidating neural substrates and environmental circumstances that are associated with or promote excessive drinking.

Events that potently trigger relapse drinking fall into three general categories: exposure to small amounts of alcohol (i.e., alcohol-induced priming), exposure to alcohol-related (i.e., conditioned) cues or environmental contexts, and stress. Clinical laboratory studies have found that compared with control subjects, alcohol-dependent people are more sensitive to the ability of these stimuli and events to elicit craving and negative affect, which in turn presumably drives an increased desire to drink (Fox et al. 2007; Sinha et al. 2008). The combination of these clinical laboratory procedures with neuroimaging techniques has proven to be a powerful tool allowing investigators to identify brain regions that are more strongly activated in alcohol-dependent subjects than in control subjects when they are exposed to these stimuli/events (George et al. 2001; Myrick et al. 2004; Wrase et al. 2002). Similar experimental procedures have been employed to evaluate the ability of pharmacotherapeutics to quell craving and temper the brain activation provoked by alcohol-related cues in humans (Anton et al. 2004; George et al. 2008; Myrick et al. 2007, 2008; O’Malley et al. 2002).

More detailed insight regarding mechanisms underlying fundamental changes in brain function that occur as a consequence of dependence and which relate to enduring relapse vulnerability have been gained through research in animals. Several animal models have been used to study alcohol self-administration behavior and the issue of relapse (for reviews, see Le and Shaham 2002; Sanchis-Segura and Spanagel 2006; Weiss 2005). In one type of model, animals with a long history of daily access to alcohol are abruptly denied access to the drug. When alcohol is reintroduced after this period of “forced” (i.e., experimenter-induced) abstinence, the animals exhibit a transient increase in alcohol consumption. This alcohol deprivation effect has been demonstrated using both measures of voluntary alcohol consumption and operant procedures3 (Heyser et al. 1997; Sinclair 1979; Spanagel and Holter 1999). Another model frequently used to study alcohol (and other drug) relapse behavior involves operant reinstatement procedures (Shaham et al. 2003). In this model, animals first are trained to respond for access to alcohol (i.e., to receive the reinforcement provided by alcohol). Then, the response-contingent reinforcement is interrupted with extinction training—that is, even if the animals perform the required response, they do not receive alcohol; as a result, the animals eventually reduce or even completely stop responding. When the animals then are exposed again to small alcohol doses, environmental stressors, or stimuli previously associated with delivery of alcohol (i.e., conditioned cues), they resume responding (to varying degrees)—as if “seeking” alcohol reinforcement (Le et al. 1998, 2000; Weiss et al. 2001). This renewed alcohol-seeking behavior becomes even more robust when several of these relevant stimuli are presented in combination (Backstrom and Hyytia 2004; Liu and Weiss 2002b). Interestingly, this reinstatement of alcohol responding occurs even though the animals still do not receive alcohol reinforcement.

This experimental design can be further modified by the use of discriminative contextual cues. This means that certain contextual cues (e.g., a unique odor or testing environment) will indicate to the animal that responding will pay off with delivery of alcohol reinforcement, whereas a different contextual cue is used to signal that responding will not result in access to alcohol. If the responding is extinguished in these animals (i.e., they cease to respond because they receive neither the alcohol-related cues nor alcohol), presentation of a discriminative cue that previously signaled alcohol availability will reinstate alcohol-seeking behavior. This renewed alcohol-seeking behavior can be observed even after a long period of time has elapsed since the animals last were given an opportunity to self-administer alcohol, suggesting that these contextual cues can serve as powerful triggers for relapse-like behavior (Ciccocioppo et al. 2001; Katner and Weiss 1999; Katner et al. 1999). Additional studies (Chaudhri et al. 2008; Zironi et al. 2006) found that reexposure of the animals to the general environmental context in which they could self-administer alcohol not only enhanced subsequent alcohol responding but also modulated the ability of alcohol-conditioned cues to reinstate alcohol-seeking behavior.

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, animals used in all of these models generally have demonstrated sensitivity to treatment with various medications that have been shown to be clinically effective in preventing and/or retarding alcohol relapse (Burattini et al. 2006; Heilig and Egli 2006; Le and Shaham 2002; Marinelli et al. 2007b; Spanagel and Kiefer 2008). From a clinical standpoint, this is important because it underscores the value of these models in identifying and evaluating new treatment strategies that may be more effective in battling the problem of relapse.

Go to:
Alcohol Dependence, Withdrawal, and Relapse
As mentioned earlier, alcohol addiction is a complex and dynamic process (see figure 1). Prolonged excessive alcohol consumption sets in motion a host of neuroadaptive changes in the brain’s reward and stress systems (for reviews, see Hansson et al. 2008; Heilig and Koob 2007; Koob and Le Moal 2008; Vengeliene et al. 2008). The development of alcohol dependence is thought to reflect an allostatic state—that is, a state in which the chronic presence of alcohol produces a constant challenge to regulatory systems that attempt (but ultimately fail) to defend the normal equilibrium of various internal processes (i.e., homeostatic set points). In the dependent individual, this allostatic state is fueled by progressive dysregulation of the brain’s reward and stress systems beyond their normal homeostatic limits (Koob 2003; Koob and Le Moal 2001). These neuroadaptive changes associated with dependence and withdrawal are postulated to impact the rewarding effects of alcohol and, consequently, contribute to the transition from controlled alcohol use to more excessive, uncontrollable drinking. Manifestations of these perturbations in brain reward and stress systems also appear to mediate the myriad symptoms of alcohol withdrawal, as well as underlie persistent vulnerability to relapse.

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
Object name is arh-31-4-348f1.jpg
Figure 1
Schematic illustration of how problem drinking can lead to the development of dependence, repeated withdrawal experiences, and enhanced vulnerability to relapse. Alcohol dependence is characterized by fundamental changes in the brain’s reward and stress systems that manifest as withdrawal symptoms when alcohol consumption is stopped or substantially reduced. These changes also are purported to fuel motivation to reengage in excessive drinking behavior. Repeated bouts of heavy drinking interspersed with attempts at abstinence (i.e., withdrawal) may result in sensitization of withdrawal symptoms, especially symptoms that contribute to a negative emotional state. This, in turn, can lead to enhanced vulnerability to relapse as well as favor perpetuation of excessive drinking.

As noted above, clinical laboratory studies have shown that alcohol-dependent people are more sensitive to relapse-provoking cues/stimuli compared with control subjects. By definition, alcohol-dependent subjects also are heavier drinkers and (too) often experience an insidious return to excessive levels of alcohol consumption once a “slip” occurs after abstinence. Not surprisingly, numerous rodent and primate models have been employed to examine the influence of dependence on relapse. Early studies using these animal models generally yielded equivocal findings, most likely because investigators used procedures that neither sufficiently established alcohol’s positive reinforcing effects prior to dependence induction nor optimized the development of alcohol’s negative reinforcing capacity (i.e., the animals did not have an opportunity to associate alcohol drinking with alleviation of withdrawal symptoms) (Meisch 1983; Meisch and Stewart 1994).

More recent studies that have incorporated these procedural considerations, however, have demonstrated increased alcohol responding and/or drinking in dependent compared with nondependent mice (Becker and Lopez 2004; Chu et al. 2007; Dhaher et al. 2008; Finn et al. 2007; Lopez and Becker 2005) and rats (O’Dell et al. 2004; Rimondini et al. 2003; Roberts et al. 2000; Sommer et al. 2008; Valdez et al. 2002). Moreover, in some studies, the enhanced alcohol consumption in dependent animals during withdrawal produced blood and brain alcohol levels that nearly reached levels attained during the initial chronic alcohol exposure which had produced the dependent state (Griffin et al. 2008; Roberts et al. 2000). Also, consistent with the findings of clinical studies, animals with a history of alcohol dependence exhibited exaggerated sensitivity to alcohol-related cues and various stressors that lead to enhanced alcohol-seeking behavior (Gehlert et al. 2007; Liu and Weiss 2002b; Sommer et al. 2008). In many instances, these effects were observed long after the animals had experienced chronic alcohol exposure (Lopez and Becker 2005; Rimondini et al. 2003; Valdez et al. 2002). Finally, experience with repeated cycles of chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal not only led to an exacerbation of the physiological symptoms of withdrawal but also to enhanced susceptibility to relapse (for more information on this issue, see the sidebar, “Repeated Alcohol Withdrawals: Sensitization and Implications for Relapse”). Thus, a growing body of evidence indicates that alcohol dependence and withdrawal experiences significantly contribute to enhanced relapse vulnerability as well as favor sustained high levels of alcohol drinking once a “slip” occurs.

Repeated Alcohol Withdrawals
Sensitization and Implications for Relapse
Given that alcoholism is a chronic relapsing disease, many alcohol-dependent people invariably experience multiple bouts of heavy drinking interspersed with periods of abstinence (i.e., withdrawal) of varying duration. A convergent body of preclinical and clinical evidence has demonstrated that a history of multiple detoxification/withdrawal experiences can result in increased sensitivity to the withdrawal syndrome—a process known as “kindling” (Becker and Littleton 1996; Becker 1998). For example, clinical studies have indicated that a history of multiple detoxifications increases a person’s susceptibility to more severe and medically complicated withdrawals in the future (e.g., Booth and Blow 1993). Similarly, animal studies have demonstrated sensitization of electrographic and behavioral measures of withdrawal seizure activity in mice following multiple withdrawals compared with animals tested after a single withdrawal episode, even if both groups of animals had been exposed to the same total amount of alcohol (e.g., Becker and Hale 1993; Becker 1994; Veatch and Becker 2002, 2005).

Effects of Repeated Withdrawals on Emotional State and Stress Response
Most studies demonstrating this sensitization or “kindling” of alcohol withdrawal primarily have focused on withdrawal-related excessive activity (i.e., hyperexcitability) of the central nervous system (CNS), as indicated by seizure activity, because this parameter is relatively easy to observe in experimental as well as clinical settings. More recently, however, researchers have been turning their attention to the evaluation of changes in withdrawal symptoms that extend beyond physical signs of withdrawal—that is, to those symptoms that fall within the domain of psychological distress and dysphoria. This new focus is clinically relevant because these symptoms (e.g., anxiety, negative affect, and altered reward set point) may serve as potent instigators driving motivation to drink (Koob and Le Moal 2008). Sensitization resulting from repeated withdrawal cycles and leading to both more severe and more persistent symptoms therefore may constitute a significant motivational factor that underlies increased risk for relapse (Becker 1998, 1999).

Furthermore, multiple withdrawal episodes provide repeated opportunities for alcohol-dependent individuals to experience the negative reinforcing properties of alcohol—that is, to associate alcohol consumption with the amelioration of the negative consequences (e.g., withdrawal-related malaise) experienced during attempts at abstinence. This association not only may serve as a powerful motivational force that increases relapse vulnerability, but also favors escalation of alcohol drinking and sustained levels of potentially harmful drinking. Thus, for many dependent individuals, repeated withdrawal experiences may be especially relevant in shaping motivation to seek alcohol and engage in excessive drinking behavior.

Support for the notion that repeated withdrawal experience progressively intensifies withdrawal symptoms—which, in turn, impacts relapse vulnerability and facilitates transition to uncontrollable drinking— primarily has come from studies involving animal models. For example, animals with a history of chronic alcohol exposure and repeated withdrawal experiences were shown to exhibit enhanced withdrawal-related anxiety, as measured in a variety of behavioral tasks (Overstreet et al. 2002, 2004; Sommer et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2007). Moreover, such a history enhanced the animals’ sensitivity to various stressors, as measured by the stressors’ ability to activate the body’s stress response system (i.e., the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenocortical [HPA] axis) (Becker 1999), to produce anxiety-like behavior (Breese et al. 2005; Sommer et al. 2008), and to trigger relapse-like behavior (Ciccocioppo et al. 2003). In all these cases, increased activity of a signaling molecule called corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) was found to be a critical mediating factor. This finding lends support to the idea that enhanced CRF activity represents a key neuroadaptive change that is fueled by repeated withdrawal experience and which drives (at least in part) the motivation to drink as well as amplifies responsiveness to stimuli/events that provoke relapse (Heilig and Koob 2007; Koob and Le Moal 2008). (For more information on the body’s stress response, including the HPA axis and CRF, see the main article.)

Additional evidence indicates that behavioral measures indicating a reduced sensitivity to rewarding stimuli (i.e., anhedonia) are exaggerated in rats that experience withdrawal from repeated alcohol injections compared with rats tested during withdrawal from a single alcohol injection (Schulteis and Liu 2006). Finally, a history of multiple withdrawal experiences can exacerbate cognitive deficits and disruption of sleep during withdrawal (Borlikova et al. 2006; Stephens et al. 2005; Veatch 2006). Taken together, these results indicate that chronic alcohol exposure involving repeated withdrawal experiences exacerbates withdrawal symptoms that significantly contribute to a negative emotional state, which consequently renders dependent subjects more vulnerable to relapse.

Effects of Repeated Withdrawals on Tolerance to Subjective Alcohol Effects and Alcohol Self-Administration
Researchers also have explored the effects of repeated withdrawal episodes on the perceived subjective effects of alcohol. In animal studies using operant discrimination procedures,1 the animals’ ability to detect (perceive) the subjective cues associated with alcohol intoxication was diminished during withdrawal from chronic alcohol exposure, and this tolerance effect was enhanced in mice that experienced multiple withdrawals during the course of the chronic alcohol treatment (Becker and Baros 2006). Similarly, rats with a history of repeated cycles of chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal exhibited long-lasting tolerance to the sedative/ hypnotic effects of alcohol (Rimondini et al. 2008). Because changes in sensitivity as well as in the ability to detect (perceive) subjective effects associated with alcohol intoxication may influence decisions about drinking and, in particular, control over the amount consumed during a given drinking occasion, these observations may be relevant to the problem of relapse and excessive drinking. Indeed, clinical studies have indicated that heavy drinkers exhibit a reduced capacity to detect (discriminate) internal cues associated with alcohol intoxication (Hiltunen 1997; Jackson et al. 2001; Schuckit and Klein 1991). Future studies will need to further explore the potential relationship between increased tolerance to subjective effects of alcohol produced by repeated withdrawal experience and enhanced propensity to imbibe.

More direct evidence supporting increased alcohol consumption as a consequence of repeated withdrawal experience comes from animal studies linking dependence models with self-administration procedures. For example, rats exposed to chronic alcohol treatment interspersed with repeated withdrawal episodes consumed significantly more alcohol than control animals under free-choice, unlimited access conditions (Rimondini et al. 2002, 2003; Sommer et al. 2008). Similar results have been reported in mice, with voluntary alcohol consumption assessed using a limited access schedule (Becker and Lopez 2004; Dhaher et al. 2008; Finn et al. 2007; Lopez and Becker 2005). Likewise, studies using operant procedures have demonstrated increased alcohol self-administration in mice (Chu et al. 2007; Lopez et al. 2008) and rats (O’Dell et al. 2004; Roberts et al. 1996, 2000) with a history of repeated chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal experience. Further, the amount of work mice (Lopez et al. 2008) and rats (Brown et al. 1998) were willing to expend in order to receive alcohol reinforcement was significantly increased following repeated withdrawal experience. This suggests that the reinforcing value of alcohol may be enhanced as a result of experiencing repeated opportunities to respond for access to alcohol in the context of withdrawal.

Enhanced alcohol responding/ intake in dependent animals occurred well beyond the period of acute withdrawal, and escalation of alcohol self-administration was especially facilitated when dependence was induced by delivering chronic alcohol in an intermittent rather than continuous fashion (Lopez and Becker 2005; O’Dell et al. 2004). This latter finding suggests that elevated alcohol self-administration does not merely result from long-term alcohol exposure per se, but rather that repeated withdrawal experiences underlie enhanced motivation for alcohol seeking/consumption. Additionally, the more cycles of chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal the animals were exposed to, the more alcohol they ingested and the longer (i.e., for several weeks) the enhanced alcohol intake was sustained following the final withdrawal episode compared with a separate group of nondependent mice (Lopez and Becker 2005). This effect apparently was specific to alcohol because repeated chronic alcohol exposure and withdrawal experience did not produce alterations in the animals’ consumption of a sugar solution (Becker and Lopez 2004). More detailed analyses of the pattern of alcohol consumption revealed that dependent mice not only consumed more alcohol than nondependent animals over the entire 2-hour period during which they had access to alcohol, but that the rate of consumption was faster and progressively increased with successive withdrawal test periods (Griffin et al. 2008).

In both mice and rats, enhanced alcohol self-administration following repeated cycles of withdrawal was associated with significantly higher resultant blood alcohol levels compared with the levels achieved by nondependent animals (Becker and Lopez 2004; Roberts et al. 2000). The greater (and faster) alcohol intake exhibited by dependent mice also lead to significantly higher peak and more sustained alcohol concentrations in the brain compared with the levels achieved after alcohol consumption in nondependent animals (Griffin et al. 2008). Finally, greater voluntary alcohol consumption in dependent mice produced brain alcohol concentrations that approximated those levels experienced during the chronic intermittent alcohol exposure which had rendered the animals dependent in the first place (see figure 2, main section). Although it is tempting to speculate that dependent animals increase voluntary alcohol drinking to attain blood and brain alcohol levels in a range consistent with sustaining dependence, the extent to which resultant brain alcohol concentrations help drive as well as perpetuate enhanced alcohol drinking in dependent animals remains to be determined.

An external file that holds a picture, illustration, etc.
Object name is arh-31-4-348f2.jpg
Figure 2
Enhanced voluntary alcohol drinking in dependent mice produced brain alcohol concentrations similar to those achieved during the chronic alcohol exposure that initially rendered the animals dependent. Samples were collected from the nucleus accumbens of alcohol-dependent mice that had undergone three cycles of chronic intermittent alcohol vapor exposure (red symbols) and nondependent controls (black symbols). Samples were taken before, during, and after the 2-hour drinking session, when the mice had the opportunity to voluntarily drink alcohol (15 percent vol/vol) or water. Alcohol intake during the drinking session was 3.04 ± 0.15 g/kg for dependent mice and 2.32 ± 0.28 g/kg for nondependent mice. The red bar indicates the 2-hour drinking session. Horizontal lines and shaded area represent brain alcohol levels (means ± SEM) measured in the dependent mice during chronic intermittent alcohol exposure (28.4 ± 3.5 mM).

NOTE: Brain alcohol concentrations (mM) were measured in microdialysis samples collected from the nucleus accumbens. Values are corrected for calculated recovery rates (∼10 percent) for microdialysis probes. SEM = standard error of the mean.

SOURCE: Data are adapted from Griffin et al. 2008.

Effects of Repeated Withdrawals on Sensitivity to Treatment
Some studies using animal models involving repeated withdrawals have demonstrated altered sensitivity to treatment with medications designed to quell sensitized withdrawal symptoms (Becker and Veatch 2002; Knapp et al. 2007; Overstreet et al. 2007; Sommer et al. 2008; Veatch and Becker 2005). Moreover, after receiving some of these medications, animals exhibited lower relapse vulnerability and/or a reduced amount consumed once drinking was (re)-initiated (Ciccocioppo et al. 2003; Finn et al. 2007; Funk et al. 2007; Walker and Koob 2008). These findings have clear clinical relevance from a treatment perspective. Indeed, clinical investigations similarly have reported that a history of multiple detoxifications can impact responsiveness to and efficacy of various pharmacotherapeutics used to manage alcohol dependence (Malcolm et al. 2000, 2002, 2007). Future studies should focus on elucidating neural mechanisms underlying sensitization of symptoms that contribute to a negative emotional state resulting from repeated withdrawal experience. Such studies will undoubtedly reveal important insights that spark development of new and more effective treatment strategies for relapse prevention as well as aid people in controlling alcohol consumption that too often spirals out of control to excessive levels.

—Howard Becker, Ph.D.

1In operant procedures, animals must first perform a certain response (e.g., press a lever) before they receive a stimulus (e.g., a small amount of alcohol). By modifying the required response (e.g., increasing the number of lever presses required before the alcohol is delivered) researchers can determine the motivational value of the stimulus for the animal.

If we are to develop better methods of integrating elderly people into society then above all we need a better sociology of the ageing and the aged. In this paper I wish to put forward the thesis that the dependency of the elderly in the twentieth century is being manufactured socially and that its severity is unnecessary. The process can therefore be revised or at least modified. Certain major influences, which will be discussed below, are steadily deepening, or widening that dependency. There is the imposition, and acceptance, of earlier retirement; the legitimation of low income; the denial of rights to self-determination in institutions; and the construction of community services for recipients assumed to be predominantly passive.

We believe in active ageing. We defend the rights of our elderly and dependents from a comprehensive socio-health care approach running from the most intensive care to support in everyday activities. We also encourage their participation in the community, always taking into account their interests and priorities.

Right to an active aging
We empower the elderly and dependent people and help them achieve autonomy and self-confidence.

Right to a dignified life
We acknowledge and mind the singularity of elderly and dependent people. We support and advise their families.

Right to an autonomous life
We empower the elderly and dependent people and help them achieve autonomy and self-confidence.

“I recovered my memory and the desire to have fun. Thank you!”

Joaquín
78 years old

Opioid dependence is becoming a more common problem in the United States that gives rise to many negative health and social consequences for both individuals and society as a whole. Opioid dependence presents a challenging issue for physicians to identify and treat. Understanding and managing withdrawal symptoms is often a necessary first step on the road to recovery for these patients. Long-term therapy options include detoxification, nonpharmacologic treatment plans, and maintenance replacement treatment with either methadone or buprenorphine. Physicians meeting necessary requirements have the option of implementing office-based opioid-assisted maintenance therapy.

Abstract
This integrative review provides an overview of nicotine dependence measures used with perinatal women and an evaluation of their psychometric properties. Fifty-five articles that met inclusion and exclusion criteria were identified from five different databases. Most of the studies used the Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND). Other approaches included diagnostic tests, the Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives (WISDM), the Tobacco Dependence Screener, and single-item measures. This review indicated that the FTND may not be the best option for measuring nicotine dependence in this population. The WISDM is a newer instrument that has excellent psychometric properties and captures nonnicotinic dimensions of nicotine dependence relevant to women. Future research is needed to assess its reliability in the perinatal population. Other recommendations from this review include the use of biomarker validation, thorough psychometric reporting on nicotine dependence instruments, and the use of multiple instruments to maximize comparability between nicotine dependence instruments.

Keywords: nicotine dependence measurement; postpartum; pregnant; smoking.

Alcohol abuse and alcoholism are common but underrecognized problems among older adults. One third of older alcoholic persons develop a problem with alcohol in later life, while the other two thirds grow older with the medical and psychosocial sequelae of early-onset alcoholism. The common definitions of alcohol abuse and dependence may not apply as readily to older persons who have retired or have few social contacts. Screening instruments can be used by family physicians to identify older patients who have problems related to alcohol. The effects of alcohol may be increased in elderly patients because of pharmacologic changes associated with aging. Interactions between alcohol and drugs, prescription and over-the-counter, may also be more serious in elderly persons. Physiologic changes related to aging can alter the presentation of medical complications of alcoholism. Management of alcohol withdrawal in elderly persons should be closely supervised by a health care professional. Alcohol treatment programs with an elder-specific focus may improve outcomes in some patients.

When caring for older patients who have problems related to alcohol use, family physicians often encounter interrelated medical, behavioral, social and environmental factors. In such cases, physicians must maintain a high index of suspicion and a non-judgmental attitude, and should be able to recognize patient defenses and effectively support the patient's family members. A flexible approach allows physicians to individualize treatment for advanced age, physical and cognitive impairment, limited financial resources and varying patient preferences.

Fundamental shifts in the delivery of health care are changing the patterns of treatment for alcohol abuse.1 Patients with mild problem drinking who do not meet the criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence may benefit from brief, targeted counseling by their family physician.2 Some older alcoholic patients may decline referral to treatment programs because of perceived negative stigma. Family physicians must manage medical complications, coordinate alcohol-related treatment and address the consequences of alcoholism for family members and the community.

Definitions of Alcohol-Related Problems
Criteria from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. (DSM-IV) for alcohol abuse and dependence are listed in Table 1.3 These criteria may be more difficult to apply to older persons, particularly those who are retired or isolated from frequent social interaction.4,5 The International Classification of Diseases-10 of the World Health Organization has added an additional category, “hazardous drinking,” to describe an individual's pattern of alcohol use that may result in negative consequences, although he or she does not meet criteria for alcohol dependence or abuse.6

TABLE 1

Criteria for Substance Abuse and Dependence
The rightsholder did not grant rights to reproduce this item in electronic media. For the missing item, see the original print version of this publication.
The equivalent of 0.5 oz of alcohol is considered one drink: approximately 1.5 oz of distilled spirits, 12 oz of beer or 5 oz of wine. For men and women 65 years of age or older, the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse considers one drink per day to be the maximum amount for “moderate” alcohol use.6

Epidemiology
In the future, as the older population grows, increasing numbers of older alcoholics will require health care.7 Although alcohol problems are often underreported, alcohol use remains common among older persons. In a study of community-dwelling persons 60 to 94 years of age, 62 percent of the subjects were found to drink alcohol, and heavy drinking was reported in 13 percent of men and 2 percent of women.8 Overall, about 6 percent of older adults are considered heavy users of alcohol. In this study, heavy drinking is defined as having more than two drinks per day.8

Alcoholic patients frequently require health care in many different settings, with the highest rates of care seen in emergency, hospital, psychiatric institution and nursing facility settings.9 In a study of 1989 Medicare hospital claims data, researchers found that 1.1 percent of all hospitalizations among beneficiaries were for alcohol-related diagnoses, and a higher percentage of admissions cited alcohol use as an underlying or associated factor.10

However, overall consumption of alcohol in the population appears to decline with advancing age.4 Researchers question whether this finding represents a true decrease in consumption as individuals age, or if it reflects differences in alcohol use between current cohorts of older persons when cross-sectionally compared with younger cohorts.4 Most longitudinal data suggest little change in alcohol consumption as people age. If change occurs, alcohol use typically decreases.4 Reasons for a decrease in or spontaneous cessation of alcohol use among older persons include increased physiologic effects per drink, medical problems that limit accessibility or desirability of alcohol, financial strain and a trend toward fewer social events that emphasize alcohol consumption.11

About two thirds of elderly alcoholic patients started drinking at a young age.7 Some attrition from alcohol-related death occurs, but many persons with early-onset alcoholism survive to develop alcohol-related illnesses compounded by changes associated with aging. Persons with early-onset alcoholism have a higher prevalence of antisocial behavior and family history of alcoholism. Decline in socioeconomic status and family estrangement are frequently seen in this group.12 Late-onset drinking accounts for the remaining one third of elderly persons who abuse alcohol, among whom a higher level of education and income is found.7 Stressful life events, such as bereavement or retirement, may trigger late-onset drinking in some, but not all, persons.13 Retirement does not predict substantial changes in alcohol use for most persons.14

Patients with late-onset alcoholism generally have greater resources and family support, are more likely to complete treatment and have somewhat better outcomes than patients with early-onset alcoholism.12,15 A longitudinal study of prognosis for older alcoholics found an overall 21 percent stable remission of late-life drinking at four years, with late-onset alcoholics almost twice as likely as early-onset alcoholics to have stable remission from treatment.15

Pharmacology of Alcohol and Aging
Effects of alcohol at the cellular and organ levels are altered by changes in physiology related to aging. Absorption of alcohol from the gastrointestinal tract is equally rapid among all age groups.9 However, the loss of lean body mass related to aging may reduce the volume of alcohol distribution, resulting in an increased peak ethanol concentration with any given dose of alcohol.9,16

Interactions that occur with alcohol, medication and the physical changes related to aging are important.9 Alcohol interacts with numerous commonly prescribed drugs.7 Drug absorption is affected by delayed gastric emptying and increased small bowel transit time related to alcohol use. Heavy drinkers who are malnourished may have hypoalbuminemia and altered protein binding. Blood flow through the liver and metabolic capacity decrease with aging. Acutely, alcohol impairs liver function, but chronic alcohol consumption may cause liver enzyme induction and enhanced drug metabolism. Fluctuating drug clearance may occur, particularly in patients who binge drink. For drugs with narrow therapeutic indexes, such as warfarin (Coumadin) or anticonvulsants, unpredictable clearance can have particularly hazardous consequences. Alcohol can adversely affect adherence to treatment, and medication regimens may be entirely abandoned during drinking binges. Concomitant abuse of or dependence on other drugs, such as benzodiazepines, occurs in about 15 percent of older alcoholic patients.17

Adverse Effects of Excessive Alcohol Use
Alcohol has adverse effects on all organ systems.16 Physiologic reserve against stressors is weakened in older persons who drink excessively. Older persons are particularly vulnerable to falls and conditions such as delirium.

Older adults are predisposed to falls when reserve in postural support mechanisms is lost. Alcohol impairs balance and judgment, and the diuretic effect of alcohol may cause orthostasis. Some chronic alcoholics develop myopathy, and strength is often impaired. A decrease in sensory input and foot drop can occur with peripheral neuropathy, which along with cerebellar damage causes the classically described wide-based ataxic gait. Osteoporosis, combined with the detrimental effects of alcohol on gait and balance, results in higher age-adjusted rates of hip fracture among older alcoholic patients.7

Several different syndromes that involve impairment of brain function can occur in alcoholic patients. Such syndromes are often superimposed on other diseases that cause cognitive impairment in older adults. Delirium, or acute confusional state, may occur during withdrawal from alcohol. Wernicke's encephalopathy describes an acute state of confusion, ataxia and abnormal eye movements that are related to thiamine deficiency. Korsakoff 's syndrome refers to an isolated memory deficit, which often manifests in confabulation. Global cognitive impairment is more common, constituting an alcohol-related dementia that may be accompanied by profound cerebral atrophy. Such patients may improve as superimposed delirium clears with abstinence, but residual deficits in memory and judgment commonly remain.16

Gastrointestinal disease and bleeding are common reasons for emergency department visits by older alcoholics.18 Elevated liver enzymes are found in 18 percent of older alcoholics,19 and may indicate alcoholic hepatitis, fatty liver or cirrhosis. One half of elderly patients with cirrhosis die within one year of diagnosis.16

Moderate drinking may exacerbate hypertension, and heavy drinking increases the risk of stroke. “Holiday heart syndrome” refers to an episode of dysrhythmia after an alcohol binge. Although alcoholic cardiomyopathy can occur with chronic, heavy alcohol use, more cardiac deaths among older adults are caused by ischemic heart disease than by alcohol-related heart disease.

Patients who abuse alcohol are immunosuppressed and, thus, are at increased risk of infection and poor outcomes. Aspiration pneumonia occurs with vomiting and a decreased level of consciousness during intoxication. Many older adults were exposed to tuberculosis during childhood, and physicians should remain vigilant for reactivated disease in older alcoholic patients. The possibility of concomitant human immunodeficiency virus infection should not be overlooked in older patients with atypical infections, particularly those who have a history of polysubstance abuse.

Nutritional deficiencies, particularly of folate and thiamine, occur when food intake is reduced because calories are derived from alcohol, or when access to nutritious food is limited. Macrocytosis should prompt a search for vitamin deficiencies of B12 and folate, but it can be caused from a direct alcohol effect without a state of nutritional deficiency.

Cancers of the head, neck and esophagus are associated with chronic alcohol abuse, and the risk is compounded by concomitant smoking. Liver cancers occur at increased rates among patients with cirrhosis.

Alcoholic patients experience disturbed sleep, with insomnia, restlessness and suppression of rapid-eye-movement sleep. Concomitant psychiatric illness, including depression, is common among older adults who abuse alcohol. For alcoholic patients, psychiatric consultation facilitates identification and integrated treatment of any comorbid psychiatric condition.

Identification of Alcohol Problems in Older Adults
A general approach to the clinical management of older alcoholics, beginning with identification of the problem, is outlined in Table 2. Alcohol abuse and dependence are under-recognized among older adults.20 The stereotypical concept of a “down and out” alcoholic hinders recognition of alcohol problems among older adults, particularly among older women.5 Various constellations of findings should raise suspicion of an alcohol problem (Table 3). Physicians should keep in mind that geriatric patients with alcohol abuse or dependence may present with new or increasing cognitive decline or self-care deficits.

Drug dependence, or physical dependence, refers to when a person requires one or more drugs in order to function. Abruptly stopping the substance may cause physical symptoms of withdrawal.

Although this can refer to dependence on medications that control health conditions, it can also be a symptom of addiction, which is different from physical dependence.

The term physical dependenceTrusted Source refers to being physically dependent on a substance but not meeting the criteria for addiction. For example, a person receiving pain medication during cancer treatment may be dependent on the medication, but that does not mean that they have an addiction to it.

The American Psychiatric Association (APA) used to distinguish between physical dependence and substance abuse. However, with the release of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5), the APA consolidated both terms with substance use disorder (SUD)Trusted Source.

However, the SUD community is trying to make a clear distinction between SUD and physical dependence to avoid confusion, mislabeling, and stigma.

This article will discuss what physical dependence is, as well as its causes, symptoms, and treatments. It will also cover when a person should seek help.


What is physical dependence?
SolStock/Getty Images
Physical dependence refers to the reliance on a substance to help a person get through the day. People may also refer to it as withdrawal syndrome, dependence syndromeTrusted Source, or abstinence syndrome, and it occurs when symptoms of withdrawal appear after a person stops taking a substance abruptly.

However, physical dependence does not equal addiction. People can experience physical dependence on prescription opioids, antidepressants, anti-epileptics, or benzodiazepines without having an addiction to them.

SUD
However, physical dependence — alongside other symptoms — may meet the criteria for SUD, according to DSM-5. By using this definition, the APA hope to prevent stigmatization associated with terms such as dependence, abuse, and addiction.

SUD is a complex condition wherein a person uncontrollably uses a substance despite this having harmful consequences.

Repeated use of these substances may result in changes in how the brain functions. This may result in withdrawal symptoms. Additionally, people may build up a tolerance to the substance, meaning that they require more of the drug to feel its effects.

SUD can result inTrusted Source behavioral, physical, and social changes, such as mood changes, deterioration of appearance, and strained relationships with friends and family.

Physical dependence vs. drug addiction
Addiction is interchangeable with the term SUD, and physical dependence falls under the SUD umbrella. Although some people may use the terms interchangeably, physical dependence does differTrusted Source from addiction.

Dependence refers to the physical symptoms of withdrawal and tolerance, while SUD refers to long-term behavioral, social, and physical changes.

It is possible for a person to experience dependence without SUD. This can often occur when the person requires long-term pain medications for chronic pain. These individuals may become dependent on pain medications to function, but they may not have an addiction to pain medication.


Causes
Physical dependence usually developsTrusted Source as a result of repeatedly consuming a given substance over a period of time. Although researchers do not fully understand the precise mechanisms, it is possible that the substances cause changes to occur in the brain and central nervous system.

Repeated exposure to a substance alters a person’s brain structure and brain chemicals to accommodate a drug. This results in alterations in homeostasis. This is the state that the body maintains for optimal functioning.

Abruptly stopping this substance disrupts homeostasis, and the body must adapt to not having the drug in the body. This may result in withdrawal symptoms.

Symptoms
According to the DSM-5, the characteristic symptom of physical dependence is withdrawal.

Although not all people will experience the same symptoms of withdrawal, some of the more common symptoms may include:

aching muscles
muscle spasms
anxiety or agitation
increased heart rate
difficulty concentrating
detachment from reality
nausea and vomiting
diarrhea
depression
hallucinations or delusions
People may be able to divide the symptoms of physical dependence into either acute withdrawal syndrome or post-acute withdrawal syndrome (PAWS).

Acute withdrawal syndrome usually lasts for a relatively short period of time, while PAWS is a low level continuation of some symptoms that can last for years or even indefinitely.

ADVERTISEMENT
Online therapy can help with long-term addiction support
Find a therapist from BetterHelp’s network of professionals for your addiction recovery journey. Take a quiz, get matched, and start getting support via phone or video sessions.

High risk substances
Drugs typically associated with the development of strong physical dependence may include the following.

Opioids
Opioids, such as codeine, are drugs that a doctor may prescribe to treat pain. Although these are effective for pain relief, they have a high risk of causing physical dependence if a person uses them for longer than prescribed.

Antidepressants
Antidepressants are a class of drug that may help reduce anxiety, low mood, and suicidal thoughts.

Although doctors do not generally consider antidepressants to be addictive, they note that some individuals may develop physical dependence on them. If the person abruptly stops the antidepressant they are taking, it could cause withdrawal symptoms.

Learn more about safely stopping antidepressants here.

Benzodiazepines
Benzodiazepines are a group of drugs called nervous system depressants. People may take these to treat anxiety or sleeping issues.

Like opioids, experts tend to consider them relatively safe when a person takes them as needed, sparingly, and for short periods of time.

When taking them chronically or over long periods of time, however, physical dependence may develop. This dependence may lead to a difficult withdrawal if the person chooses to stop taking the drugs.

Learn more about benzodiazepine withdrawal here.

Barbiturates
Barbiturates are a group of drugs that have calming effects on the body.

Given that barbiturates work in the body in a very similar way to benzodiazepines, the risk of physical dependence is still present. Some research suggests that barbiturate use has a high potential for physical dependence.

Illicit drugs
Although it is much rarer, some people may experience physical dependence, without meeting the criteria for addiction, to certain illicit drugs. These include cocaine, methamphetamine, and ketamine.

Treatment
Physical dependence does not necessarily require treatment. For example, if a person needs to take opioids long term, doctors will not recommend treatment for opioid dependence.

In fact, most people can manage their physical dependence in an outpatient setting with a simple, slow taper of that substance rather than stopping it abruptly.

When someone has SUD, however, they can receive treatment. Depending on the substance, the individual may require detoxification as the first step in their treatment plan.

Receiving treatment for SUD may include taking medications to curb substance cravings and decrease withdrawal symptoms. However, it can also include other aspects, such as undergoing psychosocial therapy.

In extreme cases of withdrawal, intoxication, or overdose, a person may also require emergency care before they receive treatment for SUD.

When to get help
A person should contact a doctor if they believe that they have a physical dependence on their medication or think that they might be developing one. People with SUD should also contact a doctor. They have the same right to treatment and care as a person with any other health condition.

Doctors will work with people to find a treatment that works for them that reduces their chances of relapsing, in the case of SUD.

Doctors may also refer people to rehabilitation centers. These centers, which are often in-patient facilities, specialize in treating SUD. However, they may not help with physical dependence.

Summary
Physical dependence is a medical condition that is separate from addiction. When abruptly stopping a substance, a person may experience adverse symptoms of withdrawal, such as confusion, hallucinations, and seizures.

People do not necessarily need to seek treatment for physical dependence. In most cases, people can manage their physical dependence by slowing tapering the drug instead of stopping it abruptly.

Codependency in Children
Would you know how to spot codependency in children?
Posted October 29, 2013
 Reviewed by Gary Drevitch
Share on FacebookShare
Share on TwitterTweet
Share via EmailEmail
Codependency is the desire to control people, including significant others, colleagues, and even children. It can have detrimental effects on healthy child development. As we are seeing an emergence of codependent parenting, I was recently asked to do an interview on the issue for a national website. I have shared that interview below to help broaden the understanding of codependency and its long-term effects.

article continues after advertisement

What is codependency?

Codependency is a learned behavior that can be passed from one generation to another. It is also known as "relationship addiction" because it is an emotional and behavioral state that affects a person’s ability to sustain a healthy, meaningful, and fulfilling relationship. Codependent relationships are often emotionally destructive and abusive.

Is codependency among children more prevalent now? Why?

While statistics on codependency in children are lacking, experts agree that it is becoming an increasingly more prevalent problem. Historically, there was an expectation that children become more autonomous at a much younger age.

Plus, many children suffer from anxiety disorders, which are related to both codependency and anxiety. Anxiety disorders are the most prevalent mental health disorder facing youth today as they affect approximately 13% of children. Codependency may contribute to separation anxiety and social anxiety.

In the past, codependency was associated with people who enabled alcohol abusers and drug addicts. Now, the term has taken on broader use and is associated with emotional dependency because parents play such an important role in shaping the identity of their children; it is not uncommon to see this issue at a young age. Codependency as an adult may very well in fact have its origins in childhood.

Children develop their sense of identity, identify their values, and learn how to communicate and express their needs and feelings based on parental interaction. Parents play a large role in shaping who and what their child becomes in life. It's easy to become so busy with everyday routines that true family time falls to the side.

article continues after advertisement

Children need a lot of time and devotion. They need parental guidance to help them develop into strong and secure individuals. Therefore, it is essential that parents spend good quality time encouraging their child to explore life, to believe in who he/she is, and most important, to feel loved, accepted, and secure. Often codependent children lack a positive parent-child relationship. They lack confidence to succeed and many don't feel accepted. In order to counteract codependency, it's important to know the common warning signs of a codependent child:

low self-esteem
the need to be in control
an excessive need to please others
anxiety and stress
extreme worry
not feeling "good enough"
non-assertive communication
blaming self for others' problems
a lack of trust
a fear of being alone
intimacy problems
difficulty making decisions
chronic anger
Sadly, codependency is often a learned behavior that carries forward into adulthood. In adulthood, codependency can mask itself through anxiety, stress, and depression. It can even wreak havoc on relationships. Codependency can become a vicious cycle continuing from one generation to another. Fortunately, with the right tools, the cycle can be broken and the healing process can begin.

Are there common themes that foster codependency?

General rules within families that may cause codependency may include:

Don't talk about your problems or how you feel.
Feelings should not be expressed.
Be strong and "suck up" your problems.
Work hard, be good, seek perfection.
Strive to meet unrealistic expectations.
Do as I say not as I do.
article continues after advertisement

Many families may have one or more of these unspoken rules or expectations, but these rules tend to lead to low self-esteem, poor coping skills, poor problem-solving skills, and unhealthy relationships.

What do you recommend parents do to prevent codependency among children?

The following tips can help prevent codependency and create a positive parent-child relationship:

Establish a trusting relationship.
Maintain healthy boundaries.
Set reasonable rules.
Set realistic expectations.
Encourage your child to openly express his/her thoughts and feelings.
Provide a nurturing and supportive environment.
Allow your child to explore and be independent.
Encourage problem solving. Don't rush to fix everything; rather, guide and encourage your child to find the solution.
Provide positive feedback and give lots of compliments.
Build self-esteem by encouraging your child to try new things, and to persevere with difficult tasks. Believe in your child's ability to achieve.
Most important, build them up with words; don't tear them down.
A primary goal of parenting is to provide an environment for children to grow to be happy and independent adults. Codependent children will struggle to achieve that goal.

Treatment of codependency includes education and individual and group therapy. Parents of codependent children must learn to challenge distortions and unrealistic expectations and identify self-defeating behavior patterns.

article continues after advertisement

If you need help breaking the cycle of codependency, contact your child's pediatrician or speak with a counselor. Sometimes breaking old habits is hard, but there are professionals out there who can help.

Impact of Internet Dependence On Children
Impact of Internet Dependence On Children
Advice November 10, 2016
Main Findings
55% of children are dependent on the Internet, according to our specific calculation.
As kids get older, their dependency on the Internet has a negative effect on their behaviour at school, their ability to make friends, their intelligence, and relationships with their parents, according to their own evaluation.
Internet dependent kids more likely have disputes with parents about Internet usage (30% compared to just 10% of those who are non-dependent).
The impact of Internet usage goes even further with half (50%) of Internet dependent kids admitting that they communicate with their parents less as a result of using their connected devices (compared to just a quarter of non-Internet dependent children).
Over half (56%) of Internet dependent children conceal their potentially risky online activities from their parents, compared to 28% of non-Internet dependent kids.
25% of children dependent on the Internet attempt to avoid parental controls, comparing with 8% of non-dependent children.
Internet-dependent children are more likely to share sensitive information on social media, such as their home address (36%) and parents’ earnings (26%) compared with 25% and 16% respectively for non-Internet dependent children.
Almost a third of those who are dependent (28%) admit that they use content that is not appropriate for kids, whereas only one-in-ten non-dependent kids admit the same.
Dependent children face cyberthreats more often than non-dependent children (48% vs. 24%). Worryingly, they are more likely to become victims of bullying not only online, but also offline (17% vs. 6%).
One of the impacts of children’s Internet-dependency is the Internet-dependency of their parents. Thus, 62% of the dependent parents surveyed had dependent children. This compares to only 32% among the non-dependent parents surveyed.
Methodology
The research, undertaken for Kaspersky Lab by iconkids & youth, comprised an online survey of 3,780 families with children aged 8 to 16 (one parent and one child per family) in seven countries:

guo4-map

The sample in every country included 540 families split into 9 categories according to the age of the child in the family (60 families with children 8 y.o., 60 with children 9 y.o. (boys and girls equally) etc. In the families with several children the child for the survey was chosen randomly).

Not all the survey results have been included in this report. To request further data please contact Kaspersky Lab at prhq@kaspersky.com.

The online generation
The Internet, for children and adults alike, is a hugely important medium. Children and young people now frequently use it to learn, communicate, interact, innovate and play. However, can you have too much of a good thing?

This study found that overuse and dependency on the Internet is a very real problem among children. Kids who once lived for activities with friends or watching TV are finding themselves increasingly dependent on the Internet, trapped in a mindset that places the digital world above real life.

Being dependent on the Internet brings risky behaviour and as kids spend more time online they are faced with more cyberthreats and an increased chance of viewing inappropriate content. This trend is also affecting children’s social skills and wellbeing, as they immerse themselves in the online world, to the detriment of their offline behaviour. It places a strain on modern family relationships and puts kids at risk, making it vital that parents set a good example and take control of their children’s Internet usage from an early age to minimise the damage.

Measuring dependency
Dependence on an activity can be something that´s pleasurable, but with continued use it becomes compulsive and can interfere with ordinary life responsibilities, such as work, relationships, or health. Users may not be aware that their behaviour is out of control or causing problems for themselves and others – especially when they are children.

In attempting to assess whether someone is dependent on using the Internet, we focussed on those children who said they are addicted to Internet use (19%), plus the number of kids whose parents said their children are addicted (27%). We also added to this the number of kids who use the Internet almost constantly (22%) according to their own admission, because even though they might not think they have a dependency, their patterns of use tell us otherwise.

As a result, we found that 55% of kids aged 8 to 16 are dependent on the Internet, and this figure rises with children getting older.

guo4-kids-01

This figure is in line with a number of recent studies in various countries around the world. For example, in the UK the communications industry regulator Ofcom found that 59% of Internet users are “hooked,” spending more than 24 hours online every week.

This report paints a worrying picture of the dangers facing young people growing up online. We will compare how dependent and non-Internet dependent kids feel their Internet use is affecting them. We will look at children’s risky behaviour, the effect of the Internet on family relationships and what type of dangers children are confronted with, before recommending advice for parents on safe Internet use.

Signs of impact
To find out the effects of prolonged Internet usage among children, we asked kids how they felt about key aspects of their daily lives by a scale from 1 to 10 points where 1 is the worst and 10 is the best. The results showed a worrying pattern as dependent children get older.

When asked about how good they feel at school, those we identified as dependent on the Internet at earlier ages gave themselves a higher score than non-dependent kids (up to 8.5 among dependent 9-year-olds compared with 8.2). However, as this group of children get older the score for being good at school drops and gets lower than the score for non-dependent kids (up to 7.5 vs. 7.9 for children aged 15).

When it comes to feeling smart, Internet dependent children aged 9 gave themselves a score of 8.4, which is higher than those classed as non-dependent who gave a score of 8.1. However, as both sets of children age, they feel their intelligence reduces at the same scale to 7.9 among children aged 15.

Making new friends is also given a higher score by Internet dependent children aged 9 (7.8 compared to 7.4). The older age groups show more contrast in their ability to make friends: Internet dependent 16 year olds only give themselves a score of 7 with non-dependent kids of this age scoring 7.7.

But it is children’s relationships with their parents which shows a marked contrast between dependent and non-dependent children at different ages. For children not dependent on the Internet the level stays relatively flat, averaging at 8.6 compared to 8.2 for dependent children. However, with the age the gap becomes even much bigger – with dependent 16-year-olds measuring their relationships with parents at 7.9 compared with 8.7 for non-dependent kids.

guo4-kids-02

Risky behaviours
Children and young people face a broad spectrum of risks when they use a computer but our study has found that kids who are dependent on the Internet also exhibit the riskiest behaviours in terms of their online activity.

We found that over a quarter (28%) of the kids we categorised as dependent freely admit that they use content that is not appropriate for children, but only one in ten (11%) non-dependent kids admit the same.

This can pose hazards for anyone surfing the Internet, but especially for children. For example, an 8-year-old might do an online search for “Lego”. But with just one missed keystroke, the word “Legs” is entered instead, and the child may be directed to a slew of websites with a focus on legs – some of which may contain pornographic material. Cartoons are another example of a search term that can easily direct to content that is not suitable for minors.

It is also logical that Internet dependent kids face more cyberthreats because they are online more often, but also because they undertake more risky activities. Almost half (48%) of those children dependent on the Internet recognise they have encountered a cyber threat, but only 24% of non-dependent children say the same. This finding is fairly constant across all the young ages we surveyed.

The most common threats faced are data loss due to viruses (11%), pornographic content (10%), password theft and account hacking (10%). Dependent children also become cyberbullying victims more often (7% vs. 1%). Worryingly, these kids are also three times more likely to experience bullying in the real world (17%) as opposed to non-dependent children (6%).

guo4-kids-03

One of the main parental concerns about children using the Internet is the sharing of sensitive information. Over a third (36%) of Internet dependent kids share information about their home address online, compared to just a quarter (25%) of non-Internet dependent children.

guo4-kids-04

We also found that 71% of Internet dependent kids share information about the school they attend, compared to 57% of other children. Children dependent on the Internet are also freely sharing information about the places they visit (60%), where their parents work (36%), and how much their parents earn (26%) comparing with much lower figures among non-addicted children (40%, 26% and 16% accordingly).

Overall, it is the younger age groups who are most guilty of sharing potentially valuable and exploitable information online, making it all the more important for parents to educate and control their children’s Internet usage from an early age.

Moreover, over half (56%) of Internet dependent children conceal their potentially risky online activities from their parents, compared to 28% of other kids.

Impact on the family
One of the great debates about the Internet is the affect it has on family relationships. On the one hand, many praise the Internet’s abilities to extend and build relationships because we can contact people across the ocean at the click of a mouse. If, for example, a parent is away on business they can easily keep in touch on video chat with kids back at home. On the other hand, there are concerns that the Internet sucks people away from direct contact with people, fostering alienation and real-world disconnection.

The impact of Internet technologies on modern family relationships cannot be underestimated but it appears that dependence on the Internet is creating a number of problems. We found that overall a third (30%) of kids who are dependent on the Internet have disputes with parents about online Internet usage, compared to just 10% of non-dependent children.

It’s interesting to note that these disputes occur more often amongst younger age groups, with the figure rising to 43% of 9 year olds.

guo4-kids-05

It appears that Internet use is also making children withdraw from their parents to a certain extent, with half (50%) of Internet dependent children admitting that they communicate less with their parents now as a result of their connected device usage, while only 25% on non-dependent kids do. A third of those who are dependent (32%) also admit that they’ve seen something on the Internet which they don’t want to talk to their parents about, whereas only one-in-ten non-dependent kids admit the same.

Parental impact
As well as the impact that Internet dependency is having on children’s ability to communicate with their parents, grown-ups own usage and steps taken to protect their children is also part of the problem and cause for concern.

The research found that Internet dependent children are more likely to have Internet dependent parents. Indeed, 62% of the parents surveyed, who qualified as dependent, had dependent children. This compares to only 32% among the non-dependent parents surveyed.

Online threats facing Internet dependent children are also increased due to weaker parental controls. Almost a third (29%) of parents of Internet dependent children have no parental control software on their computers. They are more free to surf the web and access any content easily, compared with 38% of non-dependent children.

However, despite some parents putting controls in place to safeguard their children and monitor their usage, 25% of Internet dependent children attempted to avoid parental controls, compared with 8% of non-dependent children.

When we asked children themselves which methods they consider effective to safeguard them when on the Internet, the responses were extremely enlightening. Only 53% of Internet dependent children thought password protecting specific websites was an effective solution with 74% feeling antivirus protection was an effective method. Time limits set by parents were only considered effective by half (50%) of Internet dependent kids and three quarters (72%) felt that talking with parents about the dangers was a good way to keep them safe online.

guo4-kids-06

Conclusion
The Internet provides children with a world of opportunity but, as this report shows, we need to be careful about the dangers of online dependence and effectively control kids Internet usage from an early age.

We have found a clear difference between Internet dependent and non-Internet dependent children when it comes to the level of threats they face, the impact of their activities on family relationships, and the extent to which they are likely to exhibit risky behaviour.

To help parents protect their children online from day one, we recommend taking the following steps:

Set a good example to your kids by not overusing the Internet yourselves.
Stay involved with your children’s online activities and teach them to use technology responsibly.
Place constraints on how much they use their connected devices. Set a timer – most family Internet management tools have one – so that children don’t stay on a device for too long.
Encourage your child to play outside, develop a hobby or pick up a book and read. Don’t place digital devices in your child’s bedroom as it could be a cause of distraction.
Teach children to never post identifying information (phone numbers, address, school, age), revealing photos or videos, or sexual messages online; and to never reveal passwords to anyone.
Befriend your child online until you are satisfied that she or he is ready to take responsibility for their online behaviour.
Use special parental control software to put restrictions on the device, so that your children cannot access inappropriate websites (i.e. gambling, pornography, violent video games, or movies) or apps.
Most important of all, talk. Communicating about the things your child sees on the Internet is important because it will help them to learn how to access the digital world responsibly and put the real world into context.

Emotional Dependency: Symptoms, Causes and Treatment
If you have ever felt an excessive affective bond with your romantic partner due to low self-esteem, you might need to read this.

Photo by Ehimetalor Akhere Unuabona on Unsplash
Emotional dependence defines a permanent and excessive affective bond with another person, which is associated with low self-esteem and which covers up affective deficiencies. It is a type of relationship in which the feeling of attachment and subordination to the partner prevails, which produces a series of negative emotional consequences: anxious-depressive symptoms, obsessive thoughts, sleep disturbances, unbalanced partner relationships and abandonment of social and leisure relationships.

Emotional dependence involves a psychological dependence that manifests itself through a series of addictive behaviours in a relationship where there is an asymmetry of roles, in such a way that disproportionate and inadequate behaviours are deployed to satisfy the need for affection.

In this sense, emotional dependence involves emotions, thoughts, motivations and behaviours oriented towards seeking the proximity of the other person in order to achieve feelings of satisfaction, security and recognition. It may also be accompanied by distorted beliefs about love, relationships, loneliness, separation and self.

Emotional dependence is also associated with other pathological situations such as substance abuse, eating disorders or being a victim of physical or psychological abuse.

Symptoms of emotional dependence
There are some symptoms and signs that should alert us as indicators of an emotionally dependent relationship. To assess the situation of a partner, we can look at the following characteristics:

The partner’s well-being and desires are put first
The dependent acts as if the other person’s needs, comfort and pleasure are above his or her own, and only enjoys himself or herself through the other person. Their own needs are put on the back burner and they may neglect their work or family obligations.

Idealisation of the other
The dependent person overestimates the qualities of the partner and is not able to see the more negative aspects, assuming that their partner is wonderful, perfect and never wrong. As a result, they may demand privileged treatment of their partner from others.

Complacency and conflict avoidance
People with emotional dependence often apologise to their partner when he/she gets angry even though they know they are not responsible for the anger, they do unpleasant or inappropriate activities just to please their partner, they justify their partner’s confrontations, criticism or infidelity as a lesser evil.

Distress or exaggerated fear of separation
Emotionally dependent people feel immense sadness at the possibility of the relationship with their partner breaking up, they are overwhelmed by the need to be constantly with their partner and an irrational fear of abandonment appears in the form of a permanent suspicion that the other person is thinking of ending the relationship.

Low self-esteem
Dependent people have low self-satisfaction, are subject to permanent devaluation, feel they are not up to their partner’s standards and think that previous relationships were more satisfactory.

Behavioural changes
In dependent people there are noticeable changes in the way they are and act when they are in a relationship, they can modify their routine and their tastes, and even inhibit fundamental aspects of their personality. Thus, their identity may become diluted as they adopt submissive positions in order to maintain their closeness to the other person. They also alter their leisure habits and organise all plans with their partner, often according to the partner’s tastes and desires.

Continuous displays of affection
Emotionally dependent people look for signs of affection and need to constantly check that the relationship is going well. They also suffer anguish and anxiety if they do not receive the attention they seek, an element that greatly erodes the relationship as this need is insatiable. And, despite their partner’s efforts to satisfy their demands for attention, they may suffer from constant exaggerated jealousy.

Feelings of guilt
Feelings of guilt appear in the dependent person when the other partner is not satisfied or content, has failed to please the partner permanently or after an argument with the partner. Emotionally dependent people may even feel guilty for the belittling and even abusive behaviour.

Control of the other

Dependents need to control their partner’s life (mobile phone, WhatsApp, social networks, etc.) in order to constantly know where or with whom they are, and may even develop an obsession, to make sure that they will not lose that person.

Fear of loneliness
Emotionally dependent people often prefer to suffer through a toxic relationship rather than go through a break-up, as they cannot imagine their life without the other person, feelings of loneliness and helplessness appear when they are without a partner, and they may enter into a loop of attempts to recover the relationship with their ex-partner. If the relationship is definitively broken, “emotional withdrawal syndrome” may appear, a syndrome associated with anxious and depressive symptoms after a break-up.

Break-up with friends and family
The dependent person tends to become socially isolated, reduces the frequency of leisure activities with people close to them, neglects personal relationships and confrontations often occur, as those around them do perceive the suffering and psychological impact generated by the relationship and their recommendations are not well received by the dependent person.

Emotional Dependency: Causes
The development of emotional dependence is due to the presence of various factors. Different hypotheses have been formulated about how this type of interrelationship originates, some emphasise the presence of adverse affective relationships in the relationship history of these people, and others refer to the system of beliefs shared by the Western socio-cultural context. The most salient causes of the development of emotional dependency are summarised below.

Romantic love clichés
Emotional dependency is based on myths about romantic love, which depict an asymmetrical and dysfunctional exchange of affection, where one partner is idealised and expectations about the other are nurtured by irrational beliefs. Some of these shared ideas revolve around total unity, complementarity or the myth of the “better half”, the omnipotence of love or the justification of jealousy, for example.

Parental overprotection
Overprotective behaviours on the part of some primary caregivers constitute a form of attachment that does not offer children the capacity to develop their autonomy, a lack that interferes with the construction of their own identity. And, once particular attachment patterns have been generated, they tend to be maintained over time and to generalise to other types of relationships. In this way, emotional dependence on parents that has not been well dealt with can become the trigger for a dysfunctional couple relationship.

Difficulties in emotional regulation

Some authors point to the fact that there has been a clear decline in the emotional competence of individuals. An example of this is the increase in the rate of problems such as anxiety, depression or deep feelings of isolation, dissatisfaction or dependence, all linked to intense discomfort, an unstable “I” and a fear of introspection that turn the other into the source of well-being and personal identity.

Cognitive vulnerability
The representations that an individual has developed about self and others (“Internal Operating Models”) are developed from repeated affective experiences with relevant figures, i.e. they are marked by attachment style. These models are used to predict the behaviour of the other, act as a filter that influences the interpretation of personal interactions and guide such interaction consciously and unconsciously. In dependent subjects, the cognitive schemas found evidence of beliefs about the unpredictability of having their affective needs met and the need to avoid discomfort at the expense of self-fulfilment.

Neglectful caregiving
Childhood bonding experiences marked by ongoing neglect, apathy, listlessness or indolence on the part of primary caregivers influence the development of early maladaptive patterns of mistrust or abuse. These cognitive and emotional schemas are related to poor self-concept, idealisation, seeking unsatisfied needs from others and the use of submissive strategies as a way of avoiding neglect.

Emotional Dependency: Treatment
If you have recognised yourself in the symptoms, are suffering from anxiety for this reason or the emotional dependence is affecting your relationship with your partner, psychological treatment can help you to overcome the dependence, improve your self-esteem and regain your freedom. As a result, the establishment of new relationships and meaningful bonds, such as the one generated during psychological therapy between therapist and patient, will allow you to modify the previously internalised relational models and improve the affective symptomatology.

Understanding What Is Psychological Dependence
 NORTHPOINT WASHINGTONNOVEMBER 16, 2022 ADDICTION THERAPY
a person looks sadly out a window while understanding psychological dependence
Northpoint Washington has mental health and addiction treatment programs in Washington that specialize in helping people with psychological dependence. Our experienced staff understands the unique challenges that come with this condition, and we are dedicated to providing comprehensive care that leads to lasting recovery.

If you or someone you know is struggling with addiction, please reach out for help and call 425.437.3298 today. Treatment can be successful, and there is hope for a better future.

Drug Dependence
Dependence on drugs or alcohol is a serious problem that can lead to significant health and social consequences. Drug dependence is a state of physical and psychological dependence on a drug. If you stop taking the drug, you will experience withdrawal symptoms.

Dependence differs from addiction, though the two terms are often used interchangeably. Dependence is a complex condition that includes addiction and other factors such as tolerance, withdrawal, and cravings.

Without treatment, drug dependence can be deadly. Drug overdoses are the leading cause of death for people under the age of 50 in the United States.

What Is Psychological Dependence?
Psychological dependence is when people feel they need a substance or activity to cope with daily life. This abuse can lead to addiction as the person tries to achieve the same high they felt when they first started using.

People with psychological dependence often have a strong need or craving for the substance they are abusing. They may feel like they need to use the substance to function normally. This can lead to using more of the substance than intended or using it in harmful ways.

Alcohol Dependence
About 15 million Americans suffer from alcohol dependence—or alcohol use disorder (AUD). This chronic disease is characterized by uncontrolled and compulsive drinking that leads to negative consequences in a person’s life, such as job loss, financial problems, and relationship difficulties.

AUD is a progressive disease, meaning it typically gets worse over time. Without treatment, AUD can lead to serious health problems, including liver disease, cancer, and heart disease. It can also lead to death.

What Causes Dependence?
There is no one cause of drug and alcohol dependence. It is a complex disease that can be influenced by many factors, including:

Genetics – If your parents or other close relatives have struggled with dependence, you may also be more likely to struggle.
Mental health – If you have a mental health disorder, you may be more likely to become dependent on drugs or alcohol.
Stress – If you’re stressed, you may turn to drugs or alcohol to cope.
Trauma – If you’ve experienced trauma, you may be more likely to develop dependence.
Withdrawal symptoms can be uncomfortable and even dangerous, so it is essential to get professional help if you are struggling with Dependence.

Should You Look For Treatment for Dependence?

Dependence on drugs or alcohol is a serious problem that can ruin your life. If you’re struggling with dependence, you may feel powerless and alone. But you are not alone. Millions of people suffer from dependence, and many get treatment and recover.

Learn More About Addiction Treatment Programs in Washington at Northpoint Washington
Psychological dependence can develop after using a substance for a short period of time or after years of abuse. It is a serious condition that can profoundly impact a person’s life. If you or someone you know is struggling with psychological dependence, please seek help from a qualified addiction professional.

Northpoint Washington is here to help. Our mental health and addiction treatment programs are designed to meet the unique needs of each individual. We provide comprehensive care, including individual therapy, group counseling, and medication management. Our goal is to help you achieve lasting recovery. Call us at 425.437.3298 to learn more.

Tagged alcohol dependence, drug dependence, psychological dependence

Interdependence can be defined as the relationship between two or more parties that depend on each other for survival. Every part needs to contribute something to the other party to survive.

The connection can be between people, regions, nations, or businesses. Economic interdependence occurs when a party specialize in the fulfilment of a good or service and the parties need to trade with each other to meet the other’s requirements.

What Does Interdependence Mean?
In interdependence, there are more than one party involved, the one-party will have resources that the other party need to fulfil its requirement and the transfer works both ways. Both parties need to meet their need, and both can assist each other in fulfilling the need.

The relationship of dependence can be found almost everywhere because we need other people to survive. Looking at the four relationships mentioned:

People – People depend on other people to acquire the relevant resources to survive, this could be as basic as a farmer selling his potatoes to a client.

Regions – Different regions in a country depend on each other for resources. For example, one area can have fields that can be planted and harvested for food, and the other region would buy the food from the first region.

Nations – Different nations depend on each other for resources that are not available in that nation. China could manufacture computer parts that are needed in America to build a computer.

Businesses – Businesses need each other to make money and to get resources. A company could depend on another business to supply them with the raw materials to produce their product.

These are just some of the interdependent relationships that can be found, you can look at people to a business, region to business, nation to companies, and so much more. Interdependence can be found all over society.

The nature of the relationship will determine the degree of interdependence. If the dependence is high and the one-party disappear, the other party will likely disappear as well. Client and supplier relationships are a form of reliance. A client is dependent on the supplier to supply raw materials, and the supplier is dependent on the client to pay for these raw materials. The client will use the raw material to manufacture their product. The supplier will make use of the money to buy more raw materials.

Businesses can have interdependence with financial institutions where a business needs to loan money from the financial institutions to leverage itself to grow the business. Where the financial institution needs to lend money to be financially profitable.

Interdependence Example
Jimmy bought an Uber franchise and has two cars that he operates in New York. Jimmy has two drivers that drive the Uber cars for him. From the perspective of interdependence, we can identify two essential relationships between Jimmy’s business and the other parties.

Firstly, Jimmy has an interdependent relationship with his two drivers. Jimmy needs the drivers to drive the cars and pick up his clients and drop them off at the correct location. The drivers are dependent on Jimmy to pay them for the work that they are doing for him.

Secondly, Jimmy has an interdependence with his clients, he needs to make sure the clients are picked up and dropped off at the correct location at the right time. In doing this, the client will pay, and Jimmy will be able to maintain his cars to keep offering the service.  The clients are dependent on transport and need to pay money for the service. In both these situations, the client and the business are dependent on keeping each other running, if the clients don’t need the Uber service or don’t want to pay for it then Jimmy’s company will not be able to survive.

Interdependence Conclusion
Interdependence can be defined as the relationship between two or more parties that depend on each other for survival.

The connection can be between people, regions, nations, or businesses. 

Economic interdependence occurs when a party specialize in the fulfilment of a good or service and the parties need to trade with each other to meet the other’s requirements.

The nature of the relationship will determine the degree of interdependence. 

If the dependence is high and the one-party disappears, the other party will likely disappear as well. 

FAQs
1. What does Interdependence mean?
Interdependence is the relationship between two or more parties that depend on each other for survival. This connection can be between people, regions, nations, or businesses.

2. What is the definition of economic interdependence?
Economic interdependence is when a party specialize in the fulfilment of a good or service and the parties need to trade with each other to meet the other’s requirements. In other words, it is a situation where two or more parties need to cooperate in order to satisfy the needs of each other.

3. What are some examples of Interdependence?
Some examples of interdependence can include:

People dependent on nature for survival (hunting, gathering)

Businesses dependent on suppliers for raw materials

Financial institutions dependent on businesses to loan money

Countries dependent on other countries for trade

4. What is the importance of Interdependence?
Interdependence is important because it allows for the specialization of goods and services. This leads to improved efficiency and a more prosperous economy. In addition, it also promotes cooperation and peace between nations. For example, economic interdependence can encourage two countries that are in conflict to reach a trade agreement.

5. What is the difference between interdependence and dependence?
Dependence is when a party is reliant on another party for survival. In contrast, interdependence is when two or more parties are reliant on each other for survival. For example, if a business is dependent on a supplier for raw materials, it would be considered interdependence. However, if the business was only dependent on the supplier for the raw materials, it would be considered dependence.

The Urgency of Change
Questioner: I should like to understand the nature of dependence. I have found myself depending on so many things - on women, on different kinds of amusement, on good wine, on my wife and children, on my friends, on what people say. Fortunately I no longer depend on religious entertainment, but I depend on the books I read to stimulate me and on good conversation. I see that the young are also dependent, perhaps not so much as I am, but they have their own particular forms of dependence. I have been to the East and have seen how there they depend on the guru and the family. Tradition there has greater importance and is more deeply rooted than it is here in Europe, and, of course, very much more so than in America. But we all seem to depend on something to sustain us, not only physically but, much more, inwardly. So I am wondering whether it is at all possible to be really free of dependence, and should one be free of it?

Krishnamurti: I take it you are concerned with the psychological inward attachments. The more one is attached the greater the dependence. The attachment is not only to persons but to ideas and to things. One is attached to a particular environment, to a particular country and so on. And from this springs dependence and therefore resistance. Questioner: Why resistance?

Krishnamurti: The object of my attachment is my territorial or my sexual domain. This I protect, resisting any form of encroachment on it from others. I also limit the freedom of the person to whom I am attached and limit my own freedom. So attachment is resistance. I am attached to something or somebody. That attachment is possessiveness; possessiveness is resistance, so attachment is resistance.

Questioner: Yes, I see that.

Krishnamurti: Any form of encroachment on my possessions leads to violence, legally or psychologically. So attachment is violence, resistance, imprisonment - the imprisonment of oneself and of the object of attachment. Attachment means this is mine and not yours; keep off! So this relationship is resistance against others. The whole world is divided into mine and yours: my opinion, my judgement, my advice, my God, my country - an infinity of such nonsense. Seeing all this taking place, not in abstraction but actually in our daily life, we can ask why there is this attachment to people, things and ideas. Why does one depend? All being is relationship and all relationship is in this dependence with its violence, resistance and domination. We have made the whole world into this. Where one possesses one must dominate. We meet beauty, love springs up, and immediately it turns to attachment and all this misery begins and the love has gone out of the window. Then we ask, "What has happened to our great love?" This is actually what is happening in our daily life. And, seeing all this, we can now ask: why is man invariably attached, not only to that which is lovely, but also to every form of illusion and to so many idiotic fancies?

Freedom is not a state of non-dependence; it is a positive state in which there isn't any dependence. But it is not a result, it has no cause. This must be understood very clearly before we can go into the question of why man depends or falls into the trap of attachment with all its miseries. Being attached we try to cultivate a state of independence - which is another form of resistance.

Questioner: So what is freedom? You say it is not the negation of dependence or the ending of dependence; you say it is not freedom from something, but just freedom. So what is it? Is it an abstraction or an actuality?

Krishnamurti: It is not an abstraction. It is the state of mind in which there is no form of resistance whatsoever. It is not like a river accommodating itself to boulders here and there, going round or over them. In this freedom there are no boulders at all, only the movement of the water.

Questioner: But the boulder of attachment is there, in this river of life. You can't just speak about another river in which there are no boulders.

Krishnamurti: We are not avoiding the boulder or saying it doesn't exist. We must first understand freedom. It is not the same river as the one in which there are the boulders.

Questioner: I have still got my river with its boulders, and that's what I came to ask about, not about some other unknown river without boulders. That's no good to me.

Krishnamurti: Quite right. But you must understand what freedom is in order to understand your boulders. But don't let us flog this simile to death. We must consider both freedom and attachment.

Questioner: What has my attachment to do with freedom or freedom with my attachment?

Krishnamurti: In your attachment there is pain. You want to be rid of this pain, so you cultivate detachment which is another form of resistance. In the opposite there is no freedom. These two opposites are identical and mutually strengthen each other. What you are concerned with is how to have the pleasures of attachment without its miseries. You cannot. That is why it is important to understand that freedom does not lie in detachment. In the process of understanding attachment there is freedom, not in running away from attachment. So our question now is, why are human beings attached, dependent?

Being nothing, being a desert in oneself, one hopes through another to find water. Being empty, poor, wretched, insufficient, devoid of interest or importance, one hopes through another to be enriched. Through the love of another one hopes to forget oneself. Through the beauty of another one hopes to acquire beauty. Through the family, through the nation, through the lover, through some fantastic belief, one hopes to cover this desert with flowers. And God is the ultimate lover. So one puts hooks into all these things. In this there is pain and uncertainty, and the desert seems more arid than ever before. Of course it is neither more nor less arid; it is what it was, only one has avoided looking at it while escaping through some form of attachment with its pain, and then escaping from that pain into detachment. But one remains arid and empty as before. So instead of trying to escape, either through attachment or through detachment, can we not become aware of this fact, of this deep inward poverty and inadequacy, this dull, hollow isolation? That is the only thing that matters, not attachment or detachment. Can you look at it without any sense of condemnation or evaluation? When you do, are you looking at it as an observer who looks at the observed, or without the observer?

Questioner: What do you mean, the observer?

Krishnamurti: Are you looking at it from a centre with all its conclusions of like and dislike, opinion, judgement, the desire to be free of this emptiness and so on - are you looking at this aridness with the eyes of conclusion - or are you looking with eyes that are completely free? When you look at it with completely free eyes there is no observer. If there is no observer, is there the thing observed as loneliness, emptiness, wretchedness?

Questioner: Do you mean to say that that tree doesn't exist if I look at it without conclusions, without a centre which is the observer?

Krishnamurti: Of course the tree exists.

Questioner: Why does loneliness disappear but not the tree when I look without the observer?

Krishnamurti: Because the tree is not created by the centre, by the mind of the "me". But the mind of the "me', in all its self-centred activity has created this emptiness, this isolation. And when that mind, without the centre, looks, the self-centred activity ends. So the loneliness is not. Then the mind functions in freedom. Looking at the whole structure of attachment and detachment, and the movement of pain and pleasure, we see how the mind of the "me" builds its own desert and its own escapes. When the mind of the "me" is still, then there is no desert and there is no escape.

 
Krishnamurti Texts

'Is There a God?'
‘How to Live in this World’
﻿A Dialogue with Oneself
Chapter 54 - If you hurt nature you are hurting yourself
A Dialogue with Oneself
Browse all Texts

MENTAL HEALTH  SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER & ADDICTION
What Is Nicotine Dependence?
By Teresa Maalouf, MPH Published on May 26, 2022
 Medically reviewed by Kashif J. Piracha, MD
Table of Contents
VIEW ALL
Types
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment
Nicotine is a highly addictive substance that is found in all tobacco products.1 People who use tobacco products are at high risk for developing nicotine dependence (formerly known as nicotine addiction), which is a lack of control over the need for nicotine.


According to the 2020 National Survey on Drug Use and Health, over 23 million people aged 12 and over reported dependence on nicotine.2 Tobacco products contain thousands of harmful chemicals that can affect every organ in the body and lead to serious illness and death.3

This article discusses the symptoms associated with nicotine dependence, how it's diagnosed and treated, and coping strategies for people working to overcome it.
Cropped Hand Of Woman Holding Cigarette
Oliver Helbig / Getty Images

Types of Nicotine Dependence
Nicotine exerts its effects by binding to receptors located in the brain. It also increases the concentration of a neurotransmitter (brain chemical) called dopamine. These interactions eventually lead to behavioral change reinforcement and development of nicotine dependence.


The way the body responds to nicotine is consistent, but there are different types of nicotine products, all of which can lead to nicotine dependence.4

Nicotine Products
Products that contain nicotine include:

Cigarettes
Cigars
Vaping devices
Hookahs
Chewing tobacco
Snuff
Dip
Snus
Nicotine Dependence Symptoms
The combination of the feel-good sensation paired with the reward response creates the craving for nicotine. The delay or absence of the effects of nicotine lead to the uncomfortable symptoms associated with nicotine dependence.

Typical symptoms of nicotine dependence include:5


Having urges or cravings to smoke
Feeling irritable, grouchy, or upset
Feeling jumpy or restless
Having difficulty concentrating
Having difficulty sleeping
Feeling hungry (or experiencing weight gain)
Feeling anxious, sad, or depressed

Over time, people can become increasingly dependent on nicotine. The more dependent a person becomes on the substance, the more difficult it can be to stop because of the negative feelings associated with not having nicotine.


Severe nicotine dependence is associated with the following symptoms:6


Smoking more than one pack a day
Smoking within minutes of waking up
Smoking while sick
Waking up at night to smoke
Smoking to ease symptoms of withdrawal

 What Is Withdrawal?
Causes
Exposure to nicotine, especially among youth, is the primary cause of nicotine dependence. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that nine out of 10 adults who smoke cigarettes daily first tried smoking before the age of 18.7

One 2012 study that looked at nicotine dependence symptoms among adolescent smokers over the course of four years found that symptoms of nicotine dependence began before these individuals had established regular smoking patterns. The same study also found that people who smoked cigarettes one to three times per month, and only one cigarette per day, still reported symptoms associated with nicotine dependence.8

What some people might consider a small or infrequent exposure to nicotine, can still lead to nicotine dependence.
Diagnosis
In order to diagnose nicotine dependence and decide on the most appropriate treatment option, your healthcare provider will likely ask you a series of questions, often known as the Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence (FTND).9

The FTND is a short questionnaire, consisting of only six questions, to help your provider understand how much you're smoking and your urge to smoke. Responses to each question are scored from 0 to 3. When the questionnaire is complete, your provider will add up your responses, and the total will help them determine your dependence on nicotine.9

Treatment
There is no amount of exposure to tobacco that is safe, so for nicotine dependence, treatment means quitting. Talking with a healthcare provider can help you determine which treatment option is best for you.

Smoking cessation and overcoming dependence on nicotine is a very personal experience, and there is no one-size-fits-all solution. Some people choose to use a behavioral approach by implementing strategies that fit with their lifestyle and personality, while others prefer the use of medication.

There is no right or wrong way; there is simply the way that works best for each individual. The National Institute on Drug Abuse outlines available treatment options, as summarized below.10

Behavioral Treatments
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT): Conducted by licensed professionals who help patients learn to identify triggers and develop coping strategies
Motivational interviewing: Uses counselors or coaches who talk to patients about the challenges of quitting and help foster motivation to overcome those challenges
Mindfulness: Involves patients learning strategies to reframe thoughts and tolerate negative emotions
Telephone support and quit helplines: Typically a free resource staffed by tobacco-cessation counselors who offer information and support
Text messaging, web-based services, and social media support: Technology-based support that can help increase access to care
Medications
Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT): Available without a prescription and comes in different forms, such as patches, gums, lozenges, and sprays
Wellbutrin (bupropion): Prescription medication, originally used as an antidepressant, that is as effective as NRT
Tyrvaya (varenicline): Prescription medication that helps to reduce cravings
Medication combinations: A combination of NRT and prescription treatment options
Other antidepressants: Certain antidepressants that have been found to be effective in treating nicotine dependence11
Coping
Coping with the symptoms of nicotine dependence can be challenging and uncomfortable. Here are some ways to manage cravings:12

Try NRT or talk to your healthcare provider about medications.
Avoid behaviors or situations that trigger your desire to use tobacco products.
Keep your mouth busy by chewing on things like sugar-free gum.
Remind yourself that the craving will pass.
Start a mindfulness practice or learn breathing techniques.
Summary
Nicotine dependence affects a significant portion of the population. It doesn't require a lot of exposure to nicotine or frequent use to develop a dependence on it. The symptoms of nicotine dependence can be uncomfortable, including strong urges, restlessness, irritability, anxiety, difficulty sleeping, and more.

Quitting tobacco can seem daunting but it is essential to preventing further damage to your health. There are treatment options available to those ready to take steps toward reducing and eliminating the use of nicotine.

Understanding the Terms
When dealing with issues related to substance abuse, you must understand the difference between the terms “tolerance,” “dependence,” and “addiction.” Understanding the terms will provide the proper treatment and support to those who are struggling with substance use disorder.


 
 
Tolerance
Drug tolerance occurs when someone abuses a substance over a long period. When someone continuously abuses a substance, their body becomes used to it, meaning the drug will stop having as much of an effect. When someone develops a tolerance to an addictive substance, they will begin taking a higher dose to get the same effects as before. Taking high doses of a substance may lead to many negative consequences.1

Dependence
When someone abuses high doses of an addictive substance, they may develop a dependence. Drug dependence refers to someone feeling like they cannot function normally without the use of the substance. A drug dependence can be either physical or psychological and can have many negative effects on someone’s life.

Addiction
Drug addiction affects someone’s mind and behavior. Addiction refers to the inability to control the use of drugs or alcohol. Those who struggle with addiction may try to stop using the substance but will feel like they cannot stop even though they may be experiencing negative consequences from it. Those struggling with addiction must receive the proper help and support needed to stop.2

 
How it Affects the Brain
Long-term use of drugs combined with the development of tolerance, dependence, or addiction can negatively affect the brain. Long-term drug abuse will interfere with how neurotransmitters in the brain send, receive, and process signals. This abuse can affect a person’s behaviors and their ability to think clearly and quickly.

Substance abuse also affects the brain’s natural production of dopamine. Dopamine is a chemical associated with feelings of pleasure. Taking addictive substances causes the brain to release large amounts of dopamine, which is why taking these drugs creates a euphoric high. Over time, the brain will rely on the drug for dopamine production. If the drug is not consumed, the person will begin to feel run down and like they cannot function normally. This feeling often results in cravings for the drug and can even lead to erratic behavior.3


 
 
What is Tolerance?
Drug tolerance refers to the body getting used to a substance over time. When someone develops a tolerance, they need to take a higher dose to experience the same effects.

Causes of Tolerance
The main cause of drug tolerance is abusing an addictive substance for a long time. Usually, tolerance occurs because the body starts to metabolize the drug quicker, leading to it having less effect than it did before. When the body gets used to consuming a substance, the number of cell receptors the drug attaches to the brain will decrease, leading to someone feeling like they must take a higher dose to experience the same “high” they used to receive.4

Examples of Tolerance
An example of drug tolerance would be someone taking a prescription drug, such as an opioid painkiller, that produces a pleasurable “high” when taken in large doses. Over time, as that person continues taking the prescription drug, the high that is produced will slowly decrease.
For this person to continue feeling that same high, they will have to take higher and higher doses of that prescription drug. When someone takes increasingly higher doses, they may develop a physical or psychological dependence or addiction, and they will have a higher risk of overdose.


 
 
Signs and Symptoms
Common side effects and signs of drug tolerance may include:5

Aggression
Anxiety
Consuming large amounts of drugs or alcohol
Decreased appetite
Depressed mood
Drug cravings
Irritability
Nausea
Trouble sleeping
If you or someone you know is experiencing any of these signs, proper help and support may be required to get drug use under control. There are resources available that can help.

 
 
Risks of Tolerance
Common risks associated with drug tolerance include:

Addiction
Chronic pain
Cross-tolerance, meaning tolerance to chemically similar substances
Immune-related conditions
Mental health conditions
Overdose
Physical or psychological dependence
Seizure disorders
All of these risks can be serious, and why proper treatment and support are critical for anyone struggling with substance abuse.

 
 
What is Dependence?
Drug dependence refers to someone feeling like they cannot function normally without taking a substance. Dependence can be physical or psychological and can have many negative effects on someone’s life.

Causes
The main cause of drug dependence is long-term abuse of an addictive substance. Oftentimes, when someone has developed a dependence, they first started using the drug recreationally. Recreational use then turns into regular abuse of the substance, the development of tolerance, and taking increasingly higher doses. After these stages, a person’s mind and body will feel a need to continue taking that substance to feel like they are functioning normally.6

Examples of Dependence
An example of drug dependence would be someone who smokes cigarettes regularly for some time. Nicotine is an addictive substance that can make someone develop a physical and psychological dependence over time. When someone decides to suddenly stop smoking after they’ve consumed nicotine regularly, they will experience physical dependence symptoms, such as shaking hands, physical cravings, and fatigue.

A person may also experience psychological dependence symptoms, such as feeling like smoking puts them in a calmer mood or helps them get through the day. Both of these forms of dependence can lead to relapse and make it difficult for someone to quit.

 
 
Signs and Symptoms
Common signs of drug dependence are:7

Aching muscles
Anxiety
Depression
Detachment from reality
Difficulty concentrating
Hallucinations or delusions
Increased heart rate
Nausea
Shaking
Sweating

If someone is experiencing symptoms of dependence, proper help and support will be necessary.

 
 
Difference Between Dependence and Tolerance
The main difference between tolerance and dependence is that tolerance refers to the body getting used to taking a substance and requiring higher doses. Dependence, however, refers to the physical or psychological symptoms that occur that make someone feel like they must continue taking a substance. Oftentimes, dependence and tolerance can go together. When someone develops a tolerance, they will likely develop a dependence with continued use.

What Can Dependence Lead To?
The main risk of drug dependence is that it could lead to the development of an addiction. Other risks of dependence include:

Changes in the brain’s chemical structure
Developing a tolerance
Impaired judgment
Long-term health risks
Overdose
All of these risks are serious, and proper support is necessary for those struggling with drug dependence.

 
 
What is Addiction?
Drug addiction is characterized by an inability to stop or control the use of substances despite experiencing negative consequences.

Types of Addiction
Experts recognize two main types of addiction: chemical and behavioral. Chemical addiction refers to addiction that involves the use of substances. Behavioral addiction involves compulsive behaviors that are carried out despite not having any benefit.

Signs and Symptoms
Common signs of drug addiction may include:

Development of a tolerance
Feeling withdrawn from daily activities
Inability to stop using a substance
Strong cravings for drugs or alcohol
Trouble managing daily responsibilities
Using substances in risky situations (while driving, working, etc.)
Withdrawal symptoms when you try to quit8
Addiction is serious and requires proper help and support to recover. If you or someone you know is struggling with any of these symptoms, there are resources available that can help.


 
 
Dangers of Addiction
Common dangers associated with drug addiction include:

Altering brain chemistry
Financial problems
Irrational behavior
Legal trouble
Long-term physical health issues
Mental health issues
Overdose
Relationship difficulties
Difference Between Tolerance and Addiction
The main difference between tolerance and addiction is that tolerance refers to the body getting used to using a substance and addiction refers to someone being unable to control their use of a substance. Oftentimes, tolerance and addiction can go hand in hand, as one can lead to the other.

Diagnosis
The diagnosis of drug addiction requires a comprehensive evaluation which often includes an assessment by a psychiatrist, psychologist, or licensed alcohol or drug counselor. If you or someone you know is struggling with an addiction, contacting a medical professional or a treatment center can be a good first step.

 
 
Treatment Options for Addiction
There are many treatment options available for proper support and recovery of drug addiction.

Inpatient Treatment
Inpatient treatment involves someone staying at a treatment center for a duration while they detox, receive therapy, and work on coping mechanisms to deal with their addiction. Inpatient treatment allows you to live in a structured environment away from temptations to use drugs or alcohol.

Outpatient Treatment
Outpatient treatment involves reporting to a treatment center at designated times to help with the detox process and receive therapy to manage addiction. Outpatient treatment can be a good idea for those who have work or family responsibilities that they don’t want to neglect while they are healing.

Residential Treatment
Residential treatment is similar to inpatient treatment where you stay at a treatment center for a duration of time. However, residential treatment is less intensive and resembles more of a comfortable home setting. Residential treatment will provide you with detox services and therapy, and it will help you create a plan to maintain sobriety long term.

This information should not replace a visit to a doctor or treatment center. If you are concerned that you or a loved one might be suffering from addiction to multiple substances, ask for professional help today.


Harmful use of alcohol, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO)¹, is responsible for around 5% of the global burden of disease. Physical and psychological dependence is prominent in addiction, a key identifier of the disorder. Addiction affects people differently, although there are specific signs that help professionals and those with addiction issues recognise the issues. It is important, then, that we address the signs of physical and psychological dependence properly, for the sake of the people involved and the people it affects.

Addiction can be physical and psychological because it affects the body and mind in different ways and provides different rewards or senses of satisfaction. To summarise addiction, it occurs when something is taken or engaged in in excess, which activates the brain’s reward circuitry system, resulting in reliance on the substance and issues with tolerance and withdrawal.

We are going to discuss the physical and psychological dependence signs in addiction.
We will provide a physical and psychological dependence definition, exploring what each definition means and how it affects addiction.
We will delve into the differences between physical and psychological dependence, discussing addiction in physical dependence and psychological dependence.
Throughout, we will also provide psychological dependence examples and physical dependence examples.
Finally, we will briefly touch upon the physical and psychological dependence of depressants.
Physical and Psychological Dependence, content warning banner, StudySmarter
Sign up for free to unlock all images and more.

UNLOCK NOW

Physical and Psychological Dependence, overview image of drugs and pills laid across a table with smoke, StudySmarter
Sign up for free to unlock all images and more.

UNLOCK NOW
Fig. 1 - There are physical and psychological differences in dependence.

Create and find the best flashcards for Physical and Psychological Dependence
StudySmarter's FREE web and mobile app

Get Started Now
Physical and Psychological Dependence Definition
We need to explore what we mean by physical and psychological dependence to understand how they connect to addiction. To understand the differences between the types of dependence, however, we must first define dependence.

Dependence is the state of reaching reliance on a substance or behaviour, and without it, withdrawal symptoms occur. It usually comes in the form of a scale: this can be from little to no dependence, to severe dependence.

Dependence becomes the body's new 'normal' state, and it relies on outside substances to achieve this new sense of normalcy.

What is Physical Dependence?
The body has a ‘normal’ state. When you take a drug or substance or even engage in a behaviour (such as gambling), it alters this state and gives you the pleasurable feeling associated with engaging in that behaviour. This is more apparent with substances such as alcohol, or more powerful drugs such as cocaine.

Physical dependence is where the body itself becomes dependent on a drug/substance or behaviour to achieve a sense of normality and also to achieve the initial high associated with taking the drug.

When a person stops taking the substance or engaging in the behaviour, they will experience withdrawal symptoms. It affects the body physically, down to the chemicals within the brain.

After drinking alcohol consistently and excessively for a set amount of time, the body needs the alcohol to feel ‘normal’, as it has adapted to this intake. It usually takes more alcohol to achieve the same effects, known as tolerance.

When you stop drinking alcohol after drinking it in excess for a set amount of time, you will experience withdrawal symptoms, such as shaky hands, headaches, nausea and vomiting.

Physical and Psychological Dependence, man sitting in red lighting holding a beer bottle, StudySmarter
Sign up for free to unlock all images and more.

UNLOCK NOW
Fig. 2 - Alcohol addiction can manifest in physical dependence.
Stop procrastinating with our smart planner features for Physical and Psychological Dependence
StudySmarter's FREE web and mobile app

Get Started Now
What is Psychological Dependence?
Just like the body has a normal state, the mind essentially has a normal ‘state’, too, although it’s a bit more complex than that. Psychological dependence mostly affects behaviour; once psychologically dependent on a substance of behaviour, the person involved is incapable of acting a certain way without the drugs or behaviour and may struggle to stop taking a drug or engage in behaviours despite the health issues associated with it.

People may also take a substance or engage in addicting behaviours to satisfy their emotional needs.

Psychological dependence focuses more on the mental state an addiction induces, in the sense that usually, an addiction to something allows the person to achieve a different mental state. Psychological dependence usually affects how somebody behaves, and withdrawal symptoms manifest as extreme emotional/motivational issues.

For example, a person may take a substance to feel a sense of relaxation in times of anxiety, which can eventually result in psychological dependence on this drug to feel relaxed.

Without it, they are anxious. Similarly, the behaviour of taking the drug is hard to stop. If they know they will feel anxious if they don’t take the drugs, it is hard to voluntarily submit yourself to uncomfortable feelings you could prevent by taking the drug.

Those with substance abuse issues and addiction may engage in drug use, alcohol, or addictive behaviours to self-medicate.

Khantzian (1997) discussed clinical observations of patients. They found that, in clinical observations, painful and distressing situations are significant psychological determiners in using and becoming addicted to drugs, and are involved in self-medicating.

What is the Difference Between Addiction in Physical and Psychological Dependence?
Addiction is a subtle or severe craving or dependence on something (such as alcohol or drugs) and can come in many forms.

Addiction, primarily, is defined as a physical and/or psychological dependence on substances (such as drugs or alcohol) and/or behaviours (such as gambling).

Physical and psychological dependence differ in how they affect the body and mind. Smoking cigarettes affects the body and mind in the feelings it induces and the dependence symptoms it causes.

Physical dependence is the way the substances or behaviours affect the body, whereas psychological dependence is the emotional state and needs the substance or behaviour abuse induces.

Everything you'll need for your studies in one place for Physical and Psychological Dependence
StudySmarter's FREE web and mobile app

Get Started Now
Psychological and Physical Dependence Example
We can see how smoking has both physical and psychological dependence issues.

Cigarretes contain nicotine. Nicotine aids and stimulates the release of dopamine, the feel-good neurotransmitter, and it also stimulates the neuron receptors that respond to dopamine. Smoking induces a feeling of pleasure and general relaxation through this stimulation of dopamine, so we can see why the act of smoking and taking in nicotine can become addictive.

People seek to smoke to reduce feelings of withdrawal and potential emotional issues. They seek the relaxation it offers (psychological) and may feel like they are anxious without it, and also seek the nicotine (physical), and may suffer withdrawal symptoms without it, such as restlessness, tiredness, hunger, and insomnia.

Physical and Psychological Dependence, man in a jacket at night lighting a cigarette, StudySmarter
Sign up for free to unlock all images and more.

UNLOCK NOW
Fig. 3 - Physical and psychological dependence affect the body in different ways.

Addiction itself can be physical and/or psychological. Addiction can be physical and psychological because it affects the body and mind in different ways and provides different rewards or senses of satisfaction. This occurs specifically when something is taken or engaged in excess, which activates the brain’s reward circuitry system.

What is the Difference Between Substance-related Addiction and Behavioural Addiction?
Substance-related addiction is where the person is taking or consuming something that alters their body and the brain’s chemical state and gives the person a rewarding feeling (usually described as a ‘high’). As seen in our example with dopamine and nicotine, the stimulation of certain neurotransmitters and pathways within the brain typically causes addiction if not taken carefully and within reason.

Substances can be physically consumed or taken through other means, entering the body as a substance that has a physical effect on the body and alters its chemical state.

Drugs such as heroin, cocaine, and even chocolate fall under the substance-related addiction category.

Behavioural addiction differs in that the act of engaging in a particular behaviour induces a pleasurable or relaxing feeling. Certain behavioural scientists believe, especially those involved in addiction research, that any behaviour that stimulates a person has the opportunity to become addictive, as it is directly influencing a person’s feelings.

Gambling is arguably the best example of behavioural addictions, and it was recently added to the DSM-5.

Create Physical and Psychological Dependence notes faster than ever before
StudySmarter's FREE web and mobile app

Get Started Now
Physical and Psychological Dependence of Depressants
Depressants are a type of substance that induce feelings of relaxation and tiredness, and generally reduce arousal and stimulation.

Alcohol is a good example of a depressant. Alcohol reduces inhibitions, slows down your cognitive faculties, reduces feelings of anxiety and stress, and overall tends to induce feelings of relaxation, as we discussed thoroughly above.

Problems occur when addiction becomes apparent. To achieve the same sense of relaxation and lowered feelings of arousal, such as when stressed or anxious, a person becomes physically dependent on the depressant, as they are experiencing withdrawal symptoms without it, and psychologically dependent. They struggle to feel relaxed without alcohol anymore and, to reduce their anxiety levels and feel 'normal', they have to drink.

Physical and Psychological Dependence - Key takeaways
Addiction, primarily, is defined as a physical and/or psychological dependence on substances (such as drugs or alcohol) and/or behaviours (such as gambling).
Dependence is the state of reaching reliance on a substance or behaviour, and without it, withdrawal symptoms occur. It usually comes in the form of a scale: this can be from little to no dependence, to severe dependence.
Physical dependence is where the body itself becomes dependent on the drug/substance you’re taking to achieve a sense of normality or achieve the initial high associated with taking the drug. It alters the internal body state, such as neurotransmitter levels within the brain.
Psychological dependence focuses more on the mental state that addiction induces, in the sense that usually, an addiction to something allows the person to achieve a different mental state. They may suffer emotionally without the substance, such as feeling anxious or upset.
Substance-related addiction is where the person is taking or consuming something that alters their body and the brain’s chemical state, and behavioural addiction differs in that the act of engaging in a particular behaviour induces a pleasurable or relaxing feeling.
Frequently Asked Questions about Physical and Psychological Dependence

Physical dependence is where the body itself becomes dependent on a drug/substance or behaviour to achieve a sense of normality, or also the initial high associated with taking the drug. When a person stops taking the substance or engaging in the behaviour, they will experience withdrawal symptoms.


An alcoholic is an example of physical dependence, as they are dependent on alcohol and the chemical effects it induces. Without alcohol, they will suffer from withdrawal symptoms, a physical reaction. 


Psychological dependence focuses more on the mental state an addiction induces, in the sense that usually, an addiction to something allows the person to achieve a different mind and/or emotional state. Psychological dependence usually affects how somebody behaves, and withdrawal symptoms manifest as extreme emotional/motivational issues.


Typically, physical dependence results in physical withdrawal symptoms. Signs include an inability to stop despite health concerns. In someone who drinks alcohol excessively, physical dependence may manifest as shaky hands, nausea, and vomiting when they stop drinking alcohol.


Addiction is a consistent craving for a drug, substance, or behaviour, whereas dependence focuses more on the reliance on a drug, substance or behaviour. The two are similar and one tends to exist alongside the other. 

Physical vs. Psychological Dependence
The notion that behavior can be separated into mutually exclusive components, such as mental or psychological aspects of behavior and purely physical aspects of behavior, is not sustainable given the current understanding of behavior.

All psychological and emotional processes have a physiological basis, and all complicated behaviors (behaviors that are not simply reflex actions) have a significant emotional and psychological component. The old dualistic separation of mind and body is a myth and an unrealistic way to view nearly any type of behavior. This includes behaviors associated with substance use disorders and process addictions (e.g., compulsive gambling).

Any designation of something as being “purely physical” or “purely psychological” reflects a misunderstanding of behavior in general. This applies to disease model concepts of addiction that claim that “addiction is not a choice” because individuals with substance use disorders do make choices regarding their substance abuse.  In addition, the alternative extreme viewpoint that “addiction is a choice” is also equally invalid because individuals with substance use disorders are driven by a number of physiological processes that influence their behavior in a number of contexts, and it would be a misconception to infer that anyone “chooses to become an addict” in the same way that few people would argue that most smokers who develop cancer chose to get cancer. Thus, when attempting to understand the aspects associated with the development of addictive behaviors, trying to do so from either extreme viewpoint is unrealistic and not supported by research. This includes the notions of physical dependence and psychological dependence. There is no such thing as pure physical dependence or pure psychological dependence.

Free, 24/7, confidential support via SMS. Sign up for text support to get help today.
What Is Psychological Dependence?
psychological components of addictive behaviorsThe term psychology is generally meant to refer to behavioral processes that relate to the emotions or the mind. The term psychological dependence is generally meant to describe the emotional and mental processes that are associated with the development of, and recovery from, a substance use disorder or process addiction. However, there can be no total separation of emotion and cognition from physiology. To imply that “psychological dependence” is not as serious as “physical dependence” represents a myth; in reality, these two designations do not exist as mutually exclusive categories and therefore cannot be contrasted as if they exist separately from one another.

Most individuals or references that refer to psychological dependence are referring to the cognitive and emotional aspects of addictive behaviors or the withdrawal process from drugs or alcohol as opposed to attempting to classify certain substances or activities as being psychologically addictive or physically addictive. The symptoms associated with the psychological components of addictive behaviors or with psychological dependence are generally listed as:

Cravings
Issues with anxiety that occur when someone tries to stop their addictive behavior
Issues with depression when one is not using their drug of choice or tries to stop their addictive behavior
Irritability and restlessness that occur when someone is not using their drug of choice or trying to quit
Any other issues with mood swings that occur when one is not using their substance of choice or attempting to quit
Appetite loss or increased appetite associated with not using the substance of choice
Issues with sleep associated with quitting or not using the drug of choice
Issues with uncertainty about being able to stop using the substance of choice
Denial that one has a substance use issue or romanticizing one’s substance use/abuse
Obsessing over obtaining or using the drug of choice
Cognitive issues, such as issues with concentration, memory, problem-solving, and other aspects of judgment, etc.
The aspects associated with physical dependence are typically focused around the issues of tolerance and physical withdrawal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, seizures, hallucinations, etc. The presentation of the symptoms that are most often associated with the development of psychological dependence are most likely viewed as being far more variable in their intensity than the symptoms associated with physical dependence on drugs; however, since there is no objective way to measure an individual’s subjective level of distress either emotionally or physically, this assumption cannot be empirically validated.

In addition, even symptoms that are considered to be primarily psychological in nature, such as cravings, have a large body of empirical evidence that theorizes the physiological basis and physiological processes that are associated with them, whereas both the symptoms of physical dependence (physical tolerance and physical withdrawal) also have significant empirical evidence to associate these processes with a number of psychological variables that can affect their presentation.
Don’t wait. Call us now.
Our admissions navigators are available to help 24/7 to discuss treatment.

Call
(888) 844-1249
Why call us?
Substances Associated with Psychological and Physical Dependence
The general observation here is that all substances of abuse are associated with both psychological and physical aspects of dependence; however, many sources separate the aspects of the development of a substance use disorder and the withdrawal process into substances that are associated with withdrawal symptoms that are primarily psychological in nature. Typically, these substances include:

Most stimulants, including cocaine and Ritalin
Most hallucinogenic drugs, such as LSD
Cannabis products (although there is mounting evidence that there may be a significant physical process of withdrawal that occurs in chronic users of cannabis products)
Many inhalant products
Many psychotropic medications, such as antidepressant medications
Substances associated with the development of strong physical dependence typically include:

Alcohol
Opiate drugs, such as heroin, morphine, Vicodin, etc.
Benzodiazepines, such as Xanax, Valium, Ativan, etc.
Barbiturates, such as Seconal and phenobarbital.
Numerous drugs of abuse are described as having both physical and psychological withdrawal symptoms and fostering both forms of dependence.

Discover which AAC facility fits your needs
We provide addiction and mental health care nationwide. Tell us about you and explore our locations with services and amenities tailored specifically for you.
Tell us about your needs
american addiction centers photo
Check Your Insurance
Get Text Support
The Treatment of Psychological Dependence
One very important distinction that can be made regarding the difference between drugs that are considered to result in physical versus psychological dependence is that the withdrawal process from some of the drugs that are considered to be strong candidates for physical dependence, such as alcohol, benzodiazepines, and barbiturates, can result in the development of potentially fatal seizures. However, this condition does not generally occur with withdrawal from opiate drugs, which are also considered to be extremely physically addicting.

The recovery process for individuals who have developed substance use disorders to these substances should be strictly monitored by a physician or psychiatrist who specializes in addiction medicine to identify any potential seizure activity and immediately address it.

Nonetheless, there are reports of seizures occurring in individuals recovering from other substances as well, and even though these instances may be rare, the overall approach to treating any substance use disorder should consider an initial program of physician-assisted withdrawal management. This approach should always be considered because initial recovery from any substance of abuse can be associated with significant emotional and physical distress that can lead to any number of potentially dangerous situations for the individual, such as an increased probability to overdose during a relapse, to become involved in accidents, or even to become suicidal.

In essence, long-term treatment for individuals who have “psychological addictions” or “psychological dependence” compared to individuals who have developed “physical addiction” or “physical dependence” should not differ significantly in terms of the overall plan of recovery. These individuals should still be thoroughly assessed, followed by a physician, treated for any co-occurring issues, be involved in substance use disorder therapy as the main component of the recovery, get involved in social support groups, get support from family and friends, and get involved in other adjunctive therapies that can contribute to their recovery given their own personal circumstances.

Our Treatment Centers by State
All Treatment Centers: See All Rehabs
California: Laguna Treatment Hospital
Florida: Recovery First Treatment Center
Florida: River Oaks Treatment Center
Las Vegas: Desert Hope Treatment Center
Locations Nationwide:Resolutions Recovery Residences
Massachusetts: Adcare Treatment Hospital
Mississippi: Oxford Treatment Center
New Jersey: Sunrise House Treatment Center
Rhode Island: Adcare – Outpatient
Rhode Island: Adcare – Inpatient
Texas: Greenhouse Treatment Center

Compare Our Treatment Centers
Conclusions
Psychological dependence is associated with numerous emotional and cognitive symptomsThe separate notions of physical dependence and psychological dependence are artificial and represent a myth regarding addictive behaviors. This myth is actually detrimental to the understanding and treatment of any substance use disorder.

Psychological dependence is associated with numerous emotional and cognitive symptoms, whereas physical dependence is typically associated with the development of tolerance and withdrawal symptoms that are not primarily emotional or cognitive in nature. However, understanding addictive behaviors leads to the conclusion that this artificial designation is based on invalid notions of dualism and that addictive behaviors represent the interplay of psychological and physical mechanisms. The treatment of any addictive behavior should be holistic in nature and consider all empirically validated treatment options that are appropriate for the individual in recovery.







 

